in these trying times, jackie mason is the voice of reason.

in this weeks exclusive clip for breitbart news, jackie questions the effectiveness of sexual harassment training programs for congressmen who should have learned how not to assault women when they were children and also wonders why you and i have to pay for it.

advertisement

when youre three years old, you learn how to behave with people, jackie explains. you learn how to control yourself. your mother follows you around and makes sure you know how to behave so that you dont touch anybody when they didnt ask for it, and you dont tumble people over when they dont know you, and you control your body and your behavior.

now congressmen who are 67 years old and 98 years old are being told they have to take training at this age to learn how to behave with women, jackie adds. do you think this training is gonna be of any help to them? if theyre 95 years old and they still dont know how to behave, when are they gonna learn, after they pass away?

jackie also wonders about reports that congressmen have used taxpayer funds to settle allegations of sexual harassment or assault.

whos money are they using to defend themselves? my money and yours, theyre using taxpayer money! jackie exclaims. where the hell did it start that taxpayer money should be used for low-lifes to defend themselves, with our money? im asking you a question. does this have any decency? does this have any morality, any excuse to exist?

but jackie saves perhaps his most pointed criticism for talk show host chelsea handler, who earlier this week called white house press secretary sarah huckabee sanders a harlot who wears summer whore lipstick.

chelsea handler. do you know who she is? dont feel bad if you dont, almost nobody knows who she is, jackie says. this broken-down yenta attacked sarah huckabee sanders. you know why? because all she knows is that trump is a conservative and the press is so crazy about attacking any conservative for any reason that she picked her out.

do you know what a harlot even means? it means somebody whos a low-life. you know why? because youre talking about yourself, jackie adds. use that name for yourself, dont attack an innocent, decent lady, whose only crime is that youre not too crazy about her.

jackie says it all proves that celebrities are just plain jerk-offs.

come to think of it, from whats going on now, jerk-off is a good word, because i mean that literally.

watch jackies latest above.

follow daniel nussbaum on twitter: @dnzussbaum