if true, it would be a stunning development in the russia investigation. it would mean that a top fbi official took what was an unverified piece of opposition research funded by trumps political opponent, and used it to obtain a surveillance warrant on the trump campaign.

if this happened, if you had the fbi working with a campaign, the democrats campaign, taking opposition research, dressing it all up and turning it into an intelligence document and taking it to the fisa court so they could spy on the other campaign  if that happened, that is as wrong as gets, jordan told wray.

it is also not clear yet whether strzok or other fbi officials used the dossier to launch the investigation into the trump campaign, which has cast a cloud of suspicion and fueled partisan attacks against the trump administration until this day.

as recently reported, strzok was the no. 2 official at the fbis counterintelligence division, and played a major role in the fbis investigation of clintons email server. he recommended watering down language in a statement exonerating hillary clinton from grossly negligent to extremely careless.

strzok would later sign the documents launching the probe into the trump campaign. he would also unnecessarily interview former national security adviser michael flynn in january 2017 about his calls with a russian ambassador, when he had not done anything wrong. later, flynn would be charged with lying to the fbi.

strzok was kicked off the special counsel team in july, with the fbi and justice department refusing to tell the house intelligence committee why. it was not until orchestrated leaks to the washington post and the new york times over the weekend that it was revealed that strzok had sent anti-trump text messages to another lawyer on the special counsel team, lisa page, with whom he was having an extramarital affair.

jordan suggested during his exchange with wray that strzok would not be removed for just the anti-trump texts, since fbi officials are allowed to have political opinions, share those opinions privately, and when many other members of the special counsel team have also already expressed their political bias by donating to clinton and other democrats.

jordan suggested it had something to do with the dossier.

heres the full exchange, with the key part in bold:

jordan: thank you. director, was agent peter strzok the former deputy head of counterintelligence at the fbi?

wray: i dont remember his exact title, but i believe thats correct.

jordan: and hes the same peter strzok who was a key player in the clinton investigation, the same peter strzok who interviewed cheryl mills, huma abedin, participated in the clinton  secretary clintons interview? and hes also the same peter strzok who  now we know  changed director comeys exoneration letter, changed the term gross negligence, which is a crime, to extreme carelessness? is that the same guy?

wray: well, congressman, i dont know every step that the individual you mentioned was involved in. but certainly, i know that he was heavily involved in the clinton e-mail investigation.

jordan: and he  thank you. and he  and is it  is this the same peter strzok who helped  was a key player in the russian investigation, and the same peter strzok who was put on muellers team  special counsel bob muellers team?

wray: i certainly know that he was working on the special counsels investigation. whether or not he would be characterized as

jordan: and the same

wray:  a key player on that investigation, thats really not for me to say.

jordan:  ok  and the same peter strzok that, we learned this past weekend, was removed from the special counsel team because he exchanged text messages with a colleague at the fbi that were  displayed a pro-clinton bias  is that accurate?

wray: yes.

jordan: talking about the same guy? ok.

wray: yes.

jordan: well, heres what im not getting: peter strzok is selected to be on muellers team, after all this history, put on muellers team, and then hes removed for some pro-clinton text messages. i mean, there are all kinds of people on muellers team who are pro-clinton. theres been all kinds of stories  politifact reported 96 percent of the top lawyers contributions went to clinton or obama.

but peter strzok, the guy who ran the clinton investigation; interviewed mills, abedin; interviewed secretary clinton; changed gross negligence, a crime, to the term extreme carelessness; who ran the russian investigation; who interviewed mike flynn gets put on muellers team, and then he gets kicked off for a text message thats anti-trump.

if you kicked everybody off muellers team who was anti-trump, i dont think thered be anybody left. so here  theres got to be something more here. it cant just be some text messages that show a pro-clinton, anti-trump bias. theres got to be something more. and im trying to figure out what it is.

but my hunch is it has something to do with the dossier. director, did peter strzok help produce and present the application to the fisa court to secure a warrant to spy on americans associated with the trump campaign?

wray: congressman, im not prepared to discuss anything about a fisa process in this setting.

jordan: not a  were not talking about what happened in the court. were talking about what the fbi took to the court, the application. did peter strzok  was he involved in taking that to the court?

wray: im not going to discuss in this setting anything to do with the fisa court applications.

jordan: well, lets remember a couple of things, director, and i know you know this. weve all been made aware of this in the last few weeks. lets remember a couple of things about the dossier.

the democratic national committee and the clinton campaign, which we now know were one and the same, paid the law firm, who paid fusion gps, who paid christopher steele, who then paid russians to put together a report that we call a dossier, full of all kinds of fake news, national enquirer garbage.

and its been reported that this dossier was all dressed up by the fbi, taken to the fisa court and presented as a legitimate intelligence document, that it became the basis for granting a warrant to spy on americans.

and im wondering  im wondering if that actually took place. it sure looks like it did, and the easiest way to clear it up is for you guys to tell us what was in that application and who took it there.

wray: congressman, our staffs have been having extensive interaction with both intelligence committees on our interaction with the fisa court, and i think thats the appropriate setting for those questions.

jordan: heres what i think, director wray. i think peter strzok, head of counterintelligence at the fbi; peter strzok, the guy who ran the clinton investigation, did all the interviews; peter strzok, the guy who was running the russian investigation at the fbi; peter strzok, mr. super agent at the fbi  i think hes the guy who took the application to the fisa court.

and if that happened  i mean, think  if this happened, if you had the fbi working with a campaign, the democrats campaign, taking opposition research, dressing it all up and turning it into an intelligence document and taking it to the fisa court so they could spy on the other campaign  if that happened, that is as wrong as gets.

and you know what? maybe im wrong. you could clear it all up. you could clear it all up for all of us here  all the congress who wants to know, and frankly, all of america who wants to know  you could clear all up by releasing (ph)  we sent you a letter two days ago  just release the application.

tell us what was in it. tell us if im wrong. but i dont think i am. i think thats exactly what happened. and, if it did, it is as wrong as it can be, and people who did that need to be held accountable.

wray: congressman, we will not hesitate to hold people accountable after there has been an appropriate investigation, independent and objective, by the inspector general into the handling of the prior matter. and, based on that, i will look at all available remedies, depending on what the facts are when they are found.

as to the access to the dossier, thats something that is the subject of ongoing discussion between my staff and the various intelligence committees.

jordan: theres nothing prohibiting you, director. is there anything prohibiting you from showing this committee the  what was presented to the fisa court  that  the application you all put together at the fbi, that was presented to the fisa court? is there anything preventing you from showing us that?

goodlatte: the time of the gentleman has expired. the director can respond.

wray: i do not believe that i can legally and appropriately share a fisa court submission with this committee.

jordan: im talking about what the fbi put together, not what the court had. what you took there  what was  the process put together, what you presented, what you took to the court.

wray: when i sign fisa applications, which i have to do almost every day of the week, they are all covered with a classified information cover. so thats part of why we will not be discussing it here.

jordan: director, is it likely that peter strzok  is it likely that peter strzok

goodlatte: the gentleman  the gentleman  the gentleman

jordan:  played a part in the application presented to the fisa court?

goodlatte:  the gentlemans time has expired. however, i do want to follow up on your last response to the gentleman.

this committee, the house judiciary committee, has primary jurisdiction over the foreign intelligence surveillance court. so any request for documents coming to any part of the congress should include the house judiciary committee.

and if it is classified in any way, shape or form, it can be provided to us in a classified setting, but that is information that we are very much interested in

jordan: mr. chairman

goodlatte:  and very much want to receive.

jordan:  the discussion  the chairman  yeah, i dont think theres anything prohibiting the fbi from giving us what they used to put together what was taken to the fisa court. thats what were asking for, and there is nothing prohibiting him from doing that.

goodlatte: i dont think there is, either. the time the gentleman has expired, however. you care to respond to that, director wray?

wray: no, i think ive covered.