actress emily ratajkowski hit back at critics who slammed her racy video shoot for love magazines advent calendar  which saw the model clad in lingerie and sensually covering herself in mounds of pasta  calling the negative reaction classic sexism.

in a statement wednesday ratajkowski defended the shoot from her most vocal critics, among them british tv personality piers morgan, who claimed global bimbo ratajkowski was promoting feminism.

advertisement

lol never said my love video was a feminist statement, she wrote. but now its worth saying that telling women what to do with their bodies & sexuality is actually just classic sexism. i can have opinions about feminism & also do sexy photo shoots k thanks.

lol never said my love video was a feminist statement. but now its worth saying that telling women what to do with their bodies & sexuality is actually just classic sexism. i can have opinions about feminism & also do sexy photo shoots k thanks  emily ratajkowski (@emrata) december 7, 2017

the raunchy video via love magazine may not be safe for work:

on the 3rd day of christmas my true #loveadvent gave to me @emratas amazing polemic on female empowerment. to me, female sexuality and sexiness, no matter how conditioned it may be by a patriarchal ideal, can be incredibly empowering for a woman if she feels it is empowering to her. the way i dress, act, flirt, dance, have sex  those are my decisions and they shouldn't be impacted by men. being sexy is fun and i like it. i should never have to apologize for that. my life is on my terms and if i feel like putting on sexy underwear, its for me. personal choice is the core ideal in my concept of feminism. katie directed us to say stay strong at the end of each video and i think it's a message from one woman to another. you're watching a video of a girl grinding in lingerie or whatever else and she is looking into the camera at the end saying, you do you, however you want to, fuck the rest. in the wake of the harvey fallout and women coming forward with incredible amounts of sexual harassment cases, i have been so disappointed to hear women talk about "modesty" and "our responsibility" as if we need to, yet again, adjust to make it "easier" for the rest of the world. i'm tired of having to consider how i might be perceived by men if i wear the short skirt or post a sexy instagram. i want to do what i want to do. feminism isn't about adjusting, it's about freedom and choice. do you think viewers will understand that, given the current wider conversation about the sexual objectification of women? why or why not? what are the risks? this is something i've battled with personally and publicly. i've had men comment on sexy images of me online and say "this is empowering to you? ha! i just masturbated to it so hope you feel good about yourself!" i guess that's the way people can react, which ironically, ultimately serves my point. i don't care about your reaction or what you do with my expression of self. in fact, it has nothing to do with you at all and that's the point-which is why it feels good. ultimately, if a woman wants to wear a burka or nothing at all, it's great if it's what she wants and feels good about.#staystrong link in bio to full film a post shared by love magazine (@thelovemagazine) on dec 3, 2017 at 1:09am pst

earlier this year ratajkowski appeared to call out hollywood, describing the entertainment industry as holding anti-woman employment practices and said shes been turned down for acting roles because her breasts are too big.

its like an anti-woman thing, that people dont want to work with me because my boobs are too big, she said in an interview with harpers bazaar australia. whats wrong with boobs? theyre a beautiful feminine thing that needs to be celebrated. like, who cares? they are great big, they are great small. why should that be an issue?

indeed, ratajkowski is no stranger to showing her skin from social media to the red carpet.

 a post shared by emily ratajkowski (@emrata) on mar 18, 2016 at 12:18pm pdt

outdoor showers in heaven a post shared by emily ratajkowski (@emrata) on mar 23, 2015 at 11:11am pdt

ratajkowski defended her position, saying that in the wake of the harvey weinstein sex misconduct scandal women, as feminists, shouldnt be responsible for how men perceive them.

in the wake of the harvey fallout and women coming forward with incredible amounts of sexual harassment cases, i have been so disappointed to hear women talk about modesty and our responsibility as if we need to, yet again, adjust to make it easier for the rest of the world, ratajkowski said. im tired of having to consider how i might be perceived by men if i wear the short skirt or post a sexy instagram. i want to do what i want to do.

pic.twitter.com/xlxbwsp5jl  emily ratajkowski (@emrata) december 7, 2017

this story is nothing short of wacky, mac.

follow jerome hudson on twitter @jeromeehudson