porn star august ames was found dead of an apparent suicide wednesday, one day after the adult actress was apparently bullied by social justice warriors on social media for explaining she would not perform in scenes alongside male actors who also perform in gay porn, due to health concerns.

ames, whose real name is mercedes grabowski, died of asphyxia due to hanging in what has been ruled as a suicide, according to ventura county, california officials. she was 23 years old.

advertisement

grabowski was bullied on twitter after she announced her refusal to do porn scenes with gay porn actors, citing what she claimed was a higher likelihood of contracting hiv.

whichever (lady) performer is replacing me tomorrow for @eroticaxnews , youre shooting with a guy who has shot gay porn, just to let cha know. bs is all i can say do agents really not care about who theyre representing? #ladirect i do my homework for my body  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 3, 2017

users quickly called grabowski, who was bisexual, homophobic for her remarks, prompting the actress to further explain.

not homophobic. most girls dont shoot with guys who have shot gay porn, for safety, grabowski proclaimed. thats just how it is with me. im not putting my body at risk, i dont know what they do in their private lives.

not homophobic. most girls dont shoot with guys who have shot gay porn, for safety. thats just how it is with me. im not putting my body at risk, i dont know what they do in their private lives. https://t.co/mrkt2grau4  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 3, 2017

how am i homophobic if i myself am attracted to women? not wanting to have sex with gay men is not homophobic; they dont want to have sex with me either so byeeeee  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 3, 2017

despite this, grabowski continued to take heat from the growing online mob.

ill keep my opinion in my head next time and be fake https://t.co/wrrb33dned  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 4, 2017

choose who you want to work with

dont do anything that makes you feel uncomfortable

share your thoughts hmm. well, i did all three, and twitter took a dump on me  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 4, 2017

i dont have anything to apologize for! apologizing for taking extra steps to ensue that my body stays safe? fuck you guys attacking me when none of my intentions were malicious. i fucking love the gay community! what the fuck ever! i choose who i have inside my body. no hate. https://t.co/7dsbq27k2f  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 4, 2017

grabowskis final post on twitter declared, fuck yall, before the actress apparently committed suicide.

fuck yall  august ames (@augustamesxxx) december 5, 2017

following the news of her death, users who had attacked grabowski on twitter attempted to defend themselves, which prompted other porn actors and actresses to criticize the social justice mob that attacked grabowski before her death.

my condolence for the family, friends and fans from @augustamesxxx it's really sad to hear she took suicide! but blaming me is really fucked up from you guys! i wasn't hateful to her at all! i've just said don't be stupid! we all refuse people just don't tweet about it! lm  logan moore (@loganmooreporn) december 6, 2017

shut yo fruit loop ass up. you outta anyone should know about bullying there was nothing wrong with what she said.  jenna shea (@iamjennashea) december 6, 2017

tweets regarding august ames before and after her suicide. fucked up. bruce over here is still attacking her and shes dead. with a now you know how it feels argument no less. just wow. pic.twitter.com/71ethc84k4  coyote shamrock (@therobdyke) december 7, 2017

in light of today's tragic news brazzers has decided to postpone the release of tonight's scheduled august ames scene. the scene will be posted at a more appropriate time, as we come to terms with this devastating loss. thank you for your understanding.  brazzers (@brazzers) december 6, 2017

such a sad day in our industry!!! rip baby girl august ames you surely will be missed! her presence lit up any room, that laugh was contagious you truly were and will always be a superstar. my heart goes out to her husband kevin and her family pic.twitter.com/tlzdnnvxkg  nikki delanoxxx (@nikkidelano) december 7, 2017

former porn actress jenna jameson also revealed her own story of bullying from the lgbt community, proclaiming, this mob mentality must end.

i would like to point out the incredible amount of attacks that were made on me by the lgbt community when i voiced my opinion on a trans woman being in playboy. i received death threats against me and my daughter. this went on for days. this mob mentality must end. #augustames  jenna jameson (@jennajameson) december 7, 2017

charlie nash covers technology and lgbt news for breitbart news. you can follow him on twitter @mrnashington and gab @nash, or like his page at facebook.