on thursday, first lady melania trump continued, in a more than 60-year first lady tradition, visiting childrens national hospital in washington, dc.

on her way to the hospital, mrs. trump asked for prayers for those struggling with health issues:

advertisement

on my way to @childrenshealth to read a #christmas book and visit with some of the brave patients. please keep all who are struggling with health issues in your thoughts & prayers this holiday season.  melania trump (@flotus) december 7, 2017

the first lady toured the neuroscience center where she visited with patients, families, doctors, nurses, and hospital staff.

patients alena sydnor, 25, and damian contreras, 7, guided mrs. trump to the hospitals main atrium where she was joined on a stage by santa claus.

trump took questions from the children, answering that her favorite christmas song is oh, holy night. she answered 10-year-old andys questions, saying that if she could spend her christmas anywhere, it would be on a deserted tropical island with her family.

first lady melania trump answers questions about christmas from children: "i would spend my holidays on a deserted island, a tropical island, with my family." pic.twitter.com/pqkdbynlag  nbc news (@nbcnews) december 7, 2017

another child asked the first lady what her favorite family christmas traditions were. she replied that, on christmas eve, they have dinner, then they go either to midnight mass on christmas eve or mass on christmas day. they have another dinner on christmas day, santa claus visits on that day, and they open presents and spend family time together.

young olivia asked the first lady her favorite christmas dinner food, to which she replied, healthy food, and you feel very good after. sammy asked what the first lady asked santa claus for. oo, thats a nice one, she remarked before stating that she asked for peace on the world, health, love, and kindness.

after taking questions, the first lady read from a favorite book that she called very special to her: the polar express.

i was so grateful at the opportunity to spend time with the children and their families today, and want to thank the medical staff at childrens national for their lifesaving work, said first lady melania trump.

she continued:

the holidays are a time for hope, love, traditions and family, and it is my wish for everyone to be able to celebrate them in good health with their loved ones. many of the patients and families i visited with today cannot spend the holidays at home this year, so i ask everyone to keep them in their thoughts and prayers as we hope for a speedy recovery and joyous new year.

childrens national health system detailed the 60-plus-year history of first ladies visiting the hospital, the tradition of first lady visits to childrens national dates back more than 60 years to first lady bess truman. mrs. trump most recently visited childrens national to celebrate the opening of the bunny mellon healing garden, which is dedicated to the first ladies of the united states.

follow michelle moons on twitter @michellediana.