celebrities took to social media thursday to react to sen. al frankens (d-mn) announcement that he would resign from the senate in the coming weeks after multiple women accused him of sexual misconduct.

some stars, including actor tom arnold and actress alyssa milano, appeared to express disappointment that franken was resigning. arnold claimed that frankens first accuser, journalist leeann tweeden, had been coached to bring the senator down, while milano called attention to previous allegations against donald trump.

advertisement

im disappointed with my friend leeann tweedon. her partner at kabc john phillips is a roger stone pal & they coached her for weeks to bring al franken down. id hoped shed use her voice to speak out for all women again predators like roy moore & donald trump but shes a birther  tom arnold (@tomarnold) december 7, 2017

ive gone to bat for leeann 100 times this last month hoping shed at least reveal her whole truth too but she ghosted me. i know every single detail of this political manipulation. kabc should lose their license. promoting a fraud is a federal offense & fcc violation. https://t.co/qy1cxne5tw  tom arnold (@tomarnold) december 7, 2017

at the very same time that we are asking franken to resign from senate  we are allowing an accused child molester to run for senate. at the very same time that "silence breakers" is the #timepersonoftheyear  a self professed pussy grabber was runner-up.#metoo  alyssa milano (@alyssa_milano) december 6, 2017

other celebrities like mark ruffalo and patton oswalt appeared to be satisfied with frankens resignation.

this is what character and humility looks like, comedian oswalt tweeted.

obviously you arent into child abuse, obviously you arent into sexually harassing women. neither am i, friend. i hope al franken resigns today. i dont want people like that leading us. we should all set a strong boundary on these issues together.  mark ruffalo (@markruffalo) december 7, 2017

this is what character & humility look like. https://t.co/o6id9dohvw  patton oswalt (@pattonoswalt) december 7, 2017

franken announced thursday that he would resign from the senate in the coming weeks, as eight women have come forward to accuse the minnesota lawmaker and former saturday night live star of sexual misconduct. franken had faced calls on wednesday from dozens of his fellow lawmakers to step down.

a couple months ago i felt that we had entered an important moment in the history of this country. we finally listened to women then the conversation turned to me, franken said.

i also think that it gave some people the false impression that i did things i have not done, he added. some things arent true, while others i remember very differently.

below, find hollywoods reaction to frankens resignation announcement.

the dems are always ready to dump one of their own. the gop stand behind every child molester and every harasser, including potus. as unpleasant as it is to face, that's political suicide.  bette midler (@bettemidler) december 7, 2017

senator @alfranken has resigned. he is accused of far less than the accused assaulter in the white house. and the gop rallies around an accused pedophile in alabama. shocking! #roymoore.  barbra streisand (@barbrastreisand) december 7, 2017

i hope this is fake news  report: franken will resign thursday https://t.co/innwaxwkeh  rosie (@rosie) december 7, 2017

we are spending a lot time saying al franken has to go and not nearly enough time making roy moore go. prioritize yall.  amber tamblyn (@ambertamblyn) december 6, 2017

al franken resigns. finally, we are free of all sexual predators in the u.s. government.  kumail nanjiani (@kumailn) december 7, 2017

cant win for losing  https://t.co/hbs43gfuci  don cheadle (@doncheadle) december 7, 2017

a dark day for america. franken bullied out of office. what did he do? nasty sean hannity is gleeful. they win again. democrats eat their young.  eric bogosian (@ericbogosian) december 7, 2017

good on #alfranken for doing the right thing. now let me remind everyone that a man who openly brags about grabbing women by the pussy is still our president while campaigning for an accused child molester who looks like hes going to win a senate seat.  josh gad (@joshgad) december 7, 2017

no. happy to see franken go when offenses are evidenced. wish he would have endured the ethics probe because then, when moore arrives in the senate, precedent would demand the same of him. there is a process. it matters that we ran past it here. https://t.co/fsmf4svaiz  david simon (@aodespair) december 7, 2017

did we police our own or eat our own today? i dont know, time will tell. i do know that rodger stone is taking a victory lap somewhere, and i feel sick. https://t.co/kdi8etxkyo  chaz bono (@chazbono) december 7, 2017

democrats are sitting there in the senate thinking that by forcing franken to resign they are taking a stand and showing that democrats have a zero tolerance for sexual harassment. that will not be the lesson learned here.  clay aiken (@clayaiken) december 7, 2017

follow daniel nussbaum on twitter: @dznussbaum