lip service from anyone, much less a mega-corporation, means absolutely nothing. if you want to understand the values of a person or entity, you have to watch what they do. yes, it is actually true that actions speak louder than words, and according to the actions not taken this week by nbc news, the left-wing network is making it quite clear that gay lives do not matter.

joy reid currently works for msnbc as a political analyst, weekend anchor, and appears on nbc newss crown jewel, meet the press with chuck todd.

advertisement

like everyone else at nbc, reid is a hardcore leftist and social justice warrior. but

between 2007-2009, reid, who was then a 40 year-old woman with ten years of experience in journalism under her belt, authored more than a dozen outrageously homophobic posts at her personal site, the reid report (that were just unearthed by @jamie_maz).

for two whole years, reid maintained a crusade to personally destroy then-governor charlie crist (r-fl) with the worst kind of hateful gay-bashing i have ever seen outside of a high school, much less from a prominent figure working in the legitimate media. there is not even a close second place.

although there is absolutely no evidence that crist (now a democrat congressman) is homosexual, for two-plus years, reid was relentless with her gay-hating diatribes. on top of that, she believed she was outing the twice-married (to women) crist.

below is the worst of it, much of it in the context of toxifying, vilifying, and disqualifying crist  the then- popular governor of a crucial swing state  from serving as john mccains 2008 running mate against barack obama. there is little doubt, reid was laying the groundwork to personally destroy crist as a homosexual, should he get the nod.

outing charlie crist with an unproven conspiracy theory:

miss charlie, miss charlie. stop pretending, brother its okay that you dont go for the ladies.

using crists (false) sexual preference to disqualify him from public office:

when a gay politician gets married, it usually indicates that he is highly ambitious, and desires to put himself in a position to move up the power ladder.

homophobic name-calling:

on at least 17 occasions, reid sarcastically refers to crist as miss charlie.

homophobic taunts directed at crist and his (female) wife:

now that hes married to a girl, charlie crist is being sought out for all kinds of good stuff [the gop] are wooing miss charlie to run.

again:

i can just see poor charlie on the honeymoon, ogling the male waiters and thinking to himself, god, do i actually have to see her naked?

again, this time taunting crists wife after mccain went with a different running mate:

oh and if i were charlies fiance. i wouldnt bet everything i had on that december wedding. getting engaged was kind of part of the veep marketing strategy.

reid wielding the worst kind of homophobic stereotypes:

miss charlie  would immediately start planning the state funeral down to the last flamingo-shaped napkin and get his decorator to the west wing faster than you can say george takei!'

disgusting gay-baiting:

the florida governor didnt get tapped by john mccain (get your mind out of the gutter! i meant tapped to be his veep) and he married a rich lady anyway?

again:

did i mention miss charlie also wont be on the ticket because hes gay?

reid utilizing the worst kinds of gay stereotypes to mock crists wedding:

and it wouldnt be a kind of gay wedding without a guy with a big handlebar mustache in attendance. thanks, geraldo!

more outing by way of a flat-out conspiracy theory:

but what is most interesting of all is the way [the media] pretend that they dont all know what they know about crists sexual orientation.



after writing more than a dozen blatantly homophobic taunts directed at crist, his wife, and the gay population at large, reid still has her cushy weekend anchor position.

now, this should in no way be interpreted as a call from me for nbc news to fire reid.

my point here is to take a look at the actions and decisions made by nbc news as a means to interpret the news outlets values and morality, which in this case is painfully obvious

endless, hateful, indefensible acts of homophobia are okay with nbc news.

so now we all know how this so-called progressive news outlet feels about gays and about keeping proven homophobes on the payroll.

and this is why nbc news should be given no moral authority about anything. never forget chuck todds crusade to destroy mitt romneys presidential chances in 2012 over words uttered by republican senate candidate todd akin  words that pale in comparison to the gay-bashing hate machine that is joy reid.

follow john nolte on twitter @noltenc. follow his facebook page here.