three weeks ago, in a partisan effort to dismiss what is now an admitted forgery, and what at the time was an obvious forgery, the left-wing washington posts philip bump (already a proven liar) consulted former fbi agent mark songer, a forensics documents examiner, to examine a yearbook produced by one of roy moores accusers as evidence he assaulted her. the expert concluded that the writing seems consistent with one writer.

the context of when bump published this piece is important. if you recall, the washington post was the news outlet that first broke the story of the moore allegations, and it was during this time that outside fact-checking of the posts reporting revealed serious lapses, all them pointing to a moore accuser who manufactured a false narrative.

advertisement

but in a friday morning interview on abcs good morning america, beverly young nelson admitted that she had forged a portion of what she still claims (with no credibility) is truly moores signature. the following exchange is crucially important if you are to understand just how dishonest the washington post is:

beverly, he signed your yearbook, abc news reporter tom llamas says. he did sign it, she replies. and you made some notes underneath. yes, nelson admits.

the notes underneath she references are the following:

12-22-77

olde hickory house

now, this is why this is so important:

1) this forged portion was used to back up nelsons now discredited claim that moore assaulted her as a 16-year-old.

2) this forged portion  and you are not going to believe this  is the specific part of the inscription the washington posts handwriting expert examined.

anyone with half a brain and even a dollop of intellectual honesty knew that this portion of the inscription did not match the rest. (moore denies writing any of it.) i declaratively said so two weeks ago. but here is bumps former fbi agent reassuring the public:

looking at the yearbook entry, [songer] said, it looks pretty spontaneously prepared  that is, it doesnt look like the writer stopped and restarted, as though someone were tentative in writing perhaps because they were trying to imitate another writer. it looks very fluid. i dont see any indications of unnatural writing. the writing seems consistent with one writer, he added, though he pointed out that old hickory house and the second date appear to be different stylistically  though hed need to see examples of moores hand-printed writing to be able to determine whether its authentic.

this is not only another black eye for bump, the washington post, and all of the mainstream media; it is yet another black eye for an fbi that is increasingly seen as a partisan mob of secret police working hand-in-hand with a corrupt media to overturn elections.

follow john nolte on twitter @noltenc. follow his facebook page here.