in a piece comparing jones to his populist conservative opponent judge roy moore, time notes that among joness most problematic issues with alabama voters are his pro-abortion views and his seemingly open borders stances.

jones, on the other hand, has largely out-raised moore ahead of the alabama special election and has the full support of the democratic partys establishment. but even with the controversy surrounding moore, jones still has an uphill battle, largely because of his stance on issues like abortion and immigration . alabama has not elected a democratic senator in over two decades, and voters in this red state may be hard pressed to pick one now, even if they dont approve of the alternative. [emphasis added]

jones has taken immigration positions that have put him in tune with the open borders lobby and corporate interests, all of which advocate for more immigration and more imported foreign workers while opposing president trumps planned border wall.

most recently, as breitbart news reported, moore slammed joness silence on sanctuary cities, which are local jurisdictions that refuse to cooperate with federal immigration officials, thus giving safe haven to criminal illegal aliens.

moore said in a statement:

my opponent supports amnesty and has stated that he sees no need for a border wall and has said nothing about sanctuary cities. his election would be a threat to the safety and well-being of the people of alabama and the united states at large.

when previously asked about sanctuary cities, jones deflected the question.

ill let someone else talk about sanctuary cities in california, jones told the montgomery advertiser in july.

despite its popularity among alabama voters, jones has increasingly been a vocal opponent of trumps wall along the u.s.-mexico border that would serve as the first path to ending illegal immigration in the country.

as breitbart news reported, jones said of the wall:

no, i do not. i think its too expensive, jones told fox news when asked if he supported the construction of the border wall. i dont think we need to be spending $20 billion dollars, jones continued, blasting the border wall. i want to put it on healthcare, i want to get tax cuts for the middle class.

joness supposed concerns about the cost of the border wall fail to mention the annual cost of illegal immigration that, while benefitting multinational corporations and the wealthy upper class, has been a detriment to americas working and middle classes.

as breitbart news reported, most recent estimates by the federation for american immigration reform (fair), reveal that an illegal alien costs each american taxpayer approximately $8,075, totaling a burden of roughly $116 billion annually.

john binder is a reporter for breitbart news. follow him on twitter at @jxhnbinder.