editor's note: the following column first appeared in the washington times.

we know the nov. 5 texas church shooting massacre should never have happened. because we can never expect a moral position from a monster who would do that, as a nation we have regulations and laws in place that should have prevented the previously convicted domestic batterer from buying his firearms.

but those laws failed when bureaucrats in the military failed to do the thing that bureaucrats are supposed to do best: follow procedure.

now we know the air forces failure to submit shooter devin kelleys court-martial to the fbi was not a one-off mistake; instead, it is apparently quite common for the military as a whole.

a department of defense inspector general report released monday has revealed the extent of the incompetence of the military, in general, to report relevant courts-martial to the fbi.

the goal of liberals isnt to actually keep people safe while also protecting the constitutional rights; its to use chaos as the excuse to implement their unicorn-and-rainbow collective via even more government control over the american people.

u.s. military services collectively failed to submit reports on hundreds of qualifying court-martialed service-members to the fbi, a monday department of defense inspector general report examining procedures between 2015 and 2016 found, the daily caller reports.

the military is required by law to submit both fingerprint cards and final disposition reports to the fbi for certain court-martialed offenses. overall, of the 2,502 fingerprint cards required to be submitted, we identified 601 (24 percent) that were missing. of 2,502 required final disposition reports required to be submitted, 780 (31 percent) were missing, the damning report concludes for just a single calendar year, the daily caller notes.

after the recent mass shootings, we have a replay of liberals demanding more regulations and more government involvement to stop the senseless murders. yet, as in the aftermath of the deadly texas shooting, we are reminded our society is willing and has been implementing controls intended to protect people from the beasts among us.

but then we see the same gigantic, unaccountable and bureaucratic government were relying on to implement those rules making a deadly mockery of the entire effort.

for anyone who still thinks we need more regulations and bigger government to implement them, consider this gem: last year, the fbi tasked the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms with seizing 4,000 firearms from people who did not pass background checks.

the new york post reports, gun owners who were targeted by the feds were either barred from purchasing a firearm due to their criminal backgrounds, mental health issues or other various problems.

 these are people who shouldnt have weapons in the first place, and it just takes one to do something that could have tragic consequences, former atf official david chipman told usa today. you dont want atf to stand for after the fact.  [] in total, the fbi referred 4,170 gun purchases to the atf last year for seizure, up from the 2,892 requests that were made in 2015, the paper reports.

despite this reality, liberals continue to call for more regulations, and more bureaucratic government, when its clear the very thing theyre arguing for does, in fact, make social problems worse.

but then again, the goal of liberals isnt to actually keep people safe while also protecting the constitutional rights; its to use chaos as the excuse to implement their unicorn-and-rainbow collective via even more government control over the american people.

just like how liberals and hollywood crowed about being champions for women then ended up exposed as their victimizers, they also dont really care about gun violence. for the left, every tragedy is simply a good crisis to be used to further their goal of a collective fascist state.

take, for example, the result of the kate steinle murder trial. a jury of san franciscans agreed with a public defender from san francisco and acquitted an illegal alien felon, the confessed shooter, of all crimes of violence  murder, assault and manslaughter. he was found guilty only of illegal possession of a firearm.

what a revelation about san francisco liberals  here they had the admitted killer, and they refused to punish him in any fashion for gun violence that took the life of a young woman.

this columnist contends that the liberal sanctuary city policy and national debate is having more of a negative impact than we realized. the national hectoring by liberals about how illegal aliens need to be protected from the big, bad american rule of law, i contend, is contributing to a conditioned mindset among liberals that criminal illegal aliens simply should not be held responsible for anything they do.

their refusal to convict a man who used a firearm to kill a woman, even if not initially intended, is at least involuntary manslaughter. but no, san franciscans let that slide, providing another example of the gobsmacking depth of liberal hypocrisy and fraud.

whether it be their liberal feminist political donors in hollywood sexually assaulting women, or their romanticized and illegal alien criminals protected in sanctuary cities, a liberal leadership and policies continue to place all of us in existential danger.