not many years ago, an ad for a newspaper warned that, if you miss a day, you miss a lot.

now you dont need a day to miss a lot. mere seconds of inattention can get you behind the curve. what, you didnt hear about the latest predator to fall on his sword?

the gusher of startling events puts us neck deep in the curse of interesting times. we are in the midst of cultural reckoning over sex, could be on the brink of nuclear war with north korea and may experience an economic boom as congress moves closer to historic tax reform.

then theres the white house, where the dynamics of upheaval are entering a crucial phase. although many deplorables believe they finally have a government looking out for them, much of washington and the american left are preparing to dance on the grave of donald trumps presidency.

their celebration got an early start friday with the guilty plea of gen. michael flynn and his pledge to cooperate with special counsel robert mueller. the news persuaded james comey, the insufferably self-righteous former fbi boss, and the democratic media that the clock is ticking on trumps time in the oval office.

that is one way to look at flynn  if you assume he has beans to spill. he was close to trump but its worth noting that flynn pled guilty to a single count of lying to the fbi, including about a phone conversation he had with a russian official last dec. 29  seven weeks after the election.

thats the same call that got flynn fired after less than a month as trumps national security adviser because he lied to the vice president about whether the conversation covered sanctions.

so its clear that flynn is a serial liar, but decidedly unclear whether he knows anything that would put trump in jeopardy. its important that the content of his conversations with russians are not the basis of his admitted crime and do not appear to be illegal.

no collusion, trump said saturday. there was absolutely no collusion. so we are very happy.

happy seems a stretch, but it is a fact that the probe into whether trumps campaign worked with russia to alter the election has found zero evidence so far. four trump associates have been charged, but no count relates directly to the probes original purpose.

keep reading michael goodwin's colulmn in the new york post