some of the current top russian athletes seem unlikely to have been involved in the doping scheme at the 2014 winter games in the black sea resort of sochi, russia.

evgenia medvedeva, a teenager who is heavily favored to win the womens figure skating competition at the 2018 games if she recovers from a foot injury, was only 14 at the time of the sochi games and did not participate in them.

i dont want younger athletes that have nothing to do with this to be penalized, bruno marcotte, a prominent canadian figure skating coach, said in a recent interview. but i want the truth to be exposed.

still, by permitting compliant athletes to wear olympic uniforms identifying them as russians at the 2018 games, the i.o.c. went to great lengths in an attempt to avoid any call for a boycott, which presumably would come from russian president vladimir v. putin.

a spokesman for putin, dmitry peskov, told reporters before tuesdays decision that a boycott was not being considered, despite some news media reports floating the possibility. leonid tygachev, the honorary president of the russian olympic committee, urged the country to permit its athletes to compete at the 2018 winter games, telling russian state television on tuesday that, for athletes who did not compete in sochi, let them compete clean and show that were from russia and were not pariahs.

alexander zhukov, the president of russias olympic committee, speaking to reporters in lausanne, switzerland, after the decision, said russia would discuss its participation but that the i.o.c.s willingness to identify athletes as russians and not neutrals was very important.

how these athletes react, and how to determine which of them would go, will ultimately help determine just how sweeping the i.o.c. move really is.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

medvedeva, the figure skater who also traveled to lausanne to help plead russias case, declined to say whether she would compete at the games under conditions prescribed by the i.o.c.

advertisement continue reading the main story

it will be discussed more and its very early to ask questions like that, she told reporters.

the i.o.c. said a specialized panel will screen russian athletes seeking to compete in south korea. the criteria include not having any previous doping violations, agreeing to undergo pre-games testing and complying with any other testing the panel imposes.

yet even with this panel, the i.o.c. will face an uncomfortable truth: it is almost impossible to know whether an athlete is truly clean of using banned substances.

given the sophistication of drug use, with micro-dosing techniques that go undetected, those athletes who are doping often remain one step ahead of experts policing them.

it will mean almost nothing that a particular athlete from russia  or any other country  has passed a series of drug screenings, as we have learned in past scandals, including those involving the cyclist lance armstrong and the sprinter marion jones.

these days, the i.o.c. has often been reduced to embarrassing retrospection, taking medals away from athletes and rewarding them to others years after a particular olympics ends, when urine samples are retested for prohibited substances by more sophisticated technology (there will be a ceremony in south korea to award such medals).

revelations about the state-sponsored east german system of the 1970s and 1980s did not deter widespread use of banned substances. neither did a gold medal stripped from ben johnson, the canadian sprinter who tested positive for steroids after winning the 100 meters at the 1988 summer olympics in seoul, south korea. nor did the discrediting of jones, who won five medals at the 2000 sydney olympics.

the i.o.c. has been widely criticized for indifference toward doping through the years. and few experts expect the russian scandal to be much of a deterrent, either.

its difficult to assume that one major punishment will stop this age-old practice from continuing, said scott minto, the director of the sports masters in business program at san diego state university.