the 2009 contest in atlanta, which, in the last eight years, has seen as many mayoral race recounts as it has postseason victories by the atlanta braves, suggests that another tabulation is unlikely to help ms. norwood significantly. the recount in 2009 changed the outcome by a single vote.

if ms. bottoms is eventually declared the winner and takes office next month, she would extend decades of black political power in atlanta, which has not had a white mayor since 1974. although a recent poll suggested that ms. bottoms was trailing, her campaign appeared to benefit from the support of figures like andrew young, the former atlanta mayor and civil rights leader, and an aggressive effort to depict ms. norwood as exceedingly conservative.

while the mayoral race in atlanta is formally nonpartisan, ms. bottoms made her political allegiance plain: she was a democrat whose beliefs aligned with those of a growing city known as something of a southern bastion for liberal politics. over the weekend, two of the nations most influential democrats, senators cory booker of new jersey and kamala harris of california, visited atlanta to campaign for ms. bottoms.

democrats also relentlessly targeted ms. norwood, an independent, as mary the republican and said that her ties to republicans, as well as her refusal to endorse the democratic candidate who lost a bitterly contested special election for congress in june, made her too conservative for atlanta.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the race/related newsletter join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of new york times journalists. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

yet there were relatively few conspicuous policy differences between ms. bottoms and ms. norwood, who picked up the endorsements of some prominent local democrats, as they competed to lead atlanta, a city of about 473,000 residents. like other anchors of major metropolitan areas, atlanta is struggling with severe income inequality, the perils of gentrification and gridlock for its commuters.

there is also the haze of a federal corruption inquiry at city hall that undercut mr. reeds final year. (he has not been charged with any crimes, nor has he been implicated by any of the evidence that has been made public.) and, as with most high-profile campaigns in municipal politics, there were plenty of moments when the contest seemed like little more than a proxy for settling scores and cultivating grudges.

advertisement continue reading the main story

its become more of a name-calling: shes a republican! this is the one who has been involved in criminal activity!  said robert a. holmes, a former state legislator and a biographer of maynard jackson, atlantas first black mayor. you havent really heard a lot about the issues because theres very little difference between the two.

ms. bottoms and ms. norwood both tried to portray themselves as candidates who would serve all of atlantas 242 neighborhoods, from the wealthy enclaves near the governors mansion to the area surrounding the federal penitentiary that once housed al capone. indeed, mr. holmes said he believed that many voters saw the election as a referendum on mr. reeds tenure, which included the construction of a football stadium for the atlanta falcons that cost about $1.5 billion. (on wednesday, mr. reed, who endorsed ms. bottoms, repeatedly described her as his successor.)

but the matter of whether atlanta would elect its first white mayor since the nixon era was an inescapable subject. most atlanta residents are black, and the city is a national hub of black education, entertainment and politics.

photo

yet the mathematics of black influence have shifted as atlanta has evolved.

blacks dont have a supermajority anymore and, because of that, cant just rest on the laurels of getting 90 percent of the black vote and being able to win, said andra gillespie, a political scientist at emory university who studies african-american politics. black voters are still going to be really pivotal in deciding elections, but theyre not the only group here.

especially in the campaigns closing days, race often seemed to be at the forefront. during a televised debate on sunday, ms. norwood had to answer for her use of what ms. bottoms described as racially coded language, including the terms thugs and felons, when she was secretly recorded talking about her 2009 defeat. ms. norwood, who said the footage had been spliced and doctored after her appearance before the buckhead young republicans, argued that she had been promoting the need for integrity in elections.

ms. norwood also made her own appeals to the citys black voters, including a radio advertisement starring shirley franklin, a black woman who preceded mr. reed as mayor and backed ms. norwood in this years election.

some people say that endorsement may hurt my legacy because ive endorsed a white woman over a black woman, ms. franklin said in a segment where she cited her efforts to advance civil rights and mentioned her work for mr. jackson.

this election is about character, transparency and integrity, not race, she said.

both candidates mounted major efforts to lure voters to the ballot box for an election day that was all but preordained to have a light turnout. before the polls closed tuesday night, pollsters and strategists watching the atlanta contest said their surveys suggested that the citys attitudes toward race would prove as decisive as get-out-the-vote efforts.

its a story of racial polarization, professor gillespie said. its also a story of turnout.