the services offered by a hotel concierge may seem a luxury. but thats the point. if they do their job well, concierges can help strengthen their hotels bottom line, since skilled ones can often inspire the guest to come back to a hotel, said noah lemaich, director of brand standards for sixty hotels and former head concierge for thompson hotels.

the question is whether web-based concierges offer the same advantages.

franois delahaye, general manager of the paris hotel plaza athne and chief operating officer of the dorchester collection of luxury hotels, sang the praises of human concierges in a recent interview. if the concierge can get tables at le jules verne, lami louis and other restaurants in paris, its not because of the tools they use, but because of the amount of business they bring, having contacts for a long time with the restaurants headwaiter, matre d and manager.

even younger travelers, who are most likely to depend on the internet for answers, turn to hotel concierges. mr. lemaich said travelers in their 20s and 30s will often ask concierges for their expert opinions on matters they have researched on their own. sarah dandashy, head concierge of the london west hollywood at beverly hills hotel and a member of les clefs dor usa, said millennials, like their elders, ask for help getting into hot restaurants. she said they also seek assistance identifying off-the-beaten-path places where they can find uniquely local experiences  steering visitors to melrose avenue in west hollywood for selfie-taking, for example.

concierges get some help from various web tools. in addition to goconcierge, which also helps hotels identify and follow up on guests requests, there is alice, an operations platform that helps hotel departments work together, manages concierges activities and customizes concierges communications with guests. alice, which is majority owned by expedia, bought goconcierge in september. the two say they are now building a single platform incorporating the best features of both systems.

photo

stay delightful offers what it calls a messaging-based guest service solution that allows hotel employees to communicate and collaborate across departments and interact with guests, via text.

the ivy platform, from the travel technology company go moment, uses artificial intelligence to answer guests questions, also by text. ivy, for example, can send guests a hotels wi-fi password, order drinks or towels to be sent to their room or help them check out electronically. it is used by hotels providing different levels of service, including those that do not have human concierges.

stay delightful and ivy also can notify guests of their ability to check in early or check out late, which they may have to pay an additional fee for, thus generating revenue for their hotel.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

in september, cambria, an upscale choice hotels brand, began a pilot program at its two chicago hotels that allows guests to contact local food and lifestyle bloggers via twitter and instagram for suggestions. should the pilot go well, choice will make the program available next year to guests at all cambria hotels. cambria hotels do not provide in-house concierge services.

advertisement continue reading the main story

and a small niche player, what should we do?, offers suggestions for a wide range of activities in new york city, on a website and app, and charges travelers fees for some of its services.

hotel executives, concierges and executives of concierge tool companies all agreed the rise of texting and of social media and apps like facebook, facebook messenger, whatsapp and wechat have greatly increased demands on concierges.

rainy chan, who until recently was the general manager of the peninsula hong kong, said the workload of the seven concierges employed there has tripled from 2007 to 2017. although technology helps them find information a lot faster, it also changes the expectations of guests. they expect a faster response. and the concierges get very last-minute requests for recommendations.

ten or 15 years ago, they only serviced guests in the hotel, she said. now, because of technology, they get a lot of emails from people who are not staying, but who are coming soon and have questions about hong kong.

ms. chan said the concierges at her hotel take turns focusing exclusively on replying to email messages. mr. delahaye said the plaza athnes 18-person concierge staff has a dedicated secretary to respond to guests messages and help plan their itineraries. both hotels use goconcierge.

robert marks is chef concierge at the omni hotel san diego, which is connected to petco park, the padres baseball stadium, and president of les clefs dor usa. mr. marks said he contacts certain guests, including members of omnis frequent stay program and individuals chosen at random, a week before their arrival to see if they have any special needs. he also lets them know about arts and sports events, in case they want tickets. he and his staff also call guests, like those celebrating a birthday or anniversary or frequent visitors, upon their arrival and every night of their stay. his hotel is also a goconcierge customer.

holly stiel, a veteran san francisco concierge who now teaches companies in and out of the travel field how to provide concierge services, said she believed that human concierges were here to stay. as long as people place value and are willing to pay for personalization and other attentions, there will be a demand, she said. mediocrity, she added, will certainly be replaced by technology, but the true concierge artist can never be.