so who, exactly, was he talking about, and which programs are consuming these billions and billions and trillions?

was he talking about food stamps, most of whose beneficiaries are children, elderly or disabled? (and many of the rest are working hard, just not earning enough to get by.)

was he talking about the earned-income tax credit, which rewards only those who work?

was he talking about medicaid, which again mainly benefits children, the elderly and the disabled, plus people who work hard but whose jobs dont provide health benefits?

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

we can go on down the list. the simple fact is that big spending on people who wont lift a finger doesnt actually happen in america  only in hatchs meanspirited imagination.

now, to be fair, there are some people in america who get lots of money they didnt lift a finger to earn  namely, inheritors of large estates. strange to say, however, republican legislation would give these people much more  indeed, billions and billions of dollars  without requiring any additional effort on their part.

the house version of the big tax cut would eliminate the estate tax entirely; the senate version would double the level of wealth exempted from the tax, to $22.4 million for a couple. how can this be justified if its supposedly hard to find money for childrens health care?

well, senator chuck grassley explained it all last week: i think not having the estate tax recognizes the people that are investing, as opposed to those that are just spending every darn penny they have, whether its on booze or women or movies.

advertisement continue reading the main story

hmm. somehow, i dont think limiting spending on booze, women, and movies (movies?) is going to be sufficient for the median american household  which had an income of $59,000 last year  to end up with a $22 million estate. and if you think of people who really will benefit from eliminating taxes on inheritance  people like, say, donald trump jr.  one is not immediately struck by the notion that this is a reward for their fathers abstemious lifestyles.

the important thing to realize, however, is that the hypocrisy and contempt for the public weve seen in the past few days is just the beginning.

it has been widely noted that the tax bills enacted by the house and senate are remarkably unfriendly to the middle class  in fact, the senate bill, once fully phased in, would actually raise taxes on a majority of middle-class families. but that observation captures only a small part of what is about to happen to ordinary, hard-working americans.

for budget deficits are going to soar thanks to republican legislation  probably by even more than the official scorekeepers say, because the legislation creates so many new loopholes. and offsetting those deficits will require going after the true big-ticket programs, namely medicare and social security.

oh, theyll find euphemisms to describe what theyre doing, talking solemnly about the need for entitlement reform as an act of fiscal responsibility  while their huge budget-busting tax cut for the rich gets shoved down the memory hole. but whatever words they use to cloak the reality of the situation, republicans have given their donors what they wanted  and now theyre coming for your benefits.