photo

do not be alarmed by the title, with its promise of dangerous confrontation and energy run amok. seth zvi rosenfelds downtown race riot, which opened on sunday night at the pershing square signature center, is about as likely to raise your blood pressure as a homeopathic sleeping pill.

yes, this new group production, directed by scott elliott, does feature simulated sex and copious drug use and one climactic fight that draws plenty of stage blood. it considers, among other things, the poison of racial hatred, hardly an irrelevant topic these days. and it stars a glamorously bedraggled chlo sevigny, whose name has long been a byword for downtown cool, as a drug-glazed single mom of two sexy teenagers.

whats more, downtown race riot is set in the dirty old new york of the late 1970s, when life (and apartments) were cheap  a time and place resurrected with love and squalor in the current hbo hit the deuce. and true to form for the new group, which is always precise in its nostalgie de la boue, the production has been designed with a perfectionists eye for louche period detail.

but when ms. sevignys character retreats to the sanctuary of her psychedelically patterned bedroom and begins nodding off, you may feel like joining her in what looks like a seriously comfortable bed. not for anything untoward, i hasten to add, but because you are likely to have felt your eyelids getting heavier and heavier, almost from the plays inception.

advertisement continue reading the main story

downtown race riot is not only set in the 1970s; it also feels as if it might have been written during that time, by someone who had seen and admired both the martin scorsese film mean streets and lanford wilsons lyrical plays about social misfits. like the scorsese movie, mr. rosenfelds play is in part a portrait of friendship and betrayal among wild and clumsy young men on societys margins. and it shares with wilson works like balm in gilead and the hot l baltimore an affection for born losers, trying (and failing) to help one another.