s.n.l. has recently found itself in the uncomfortable position of criticizing names close to the show. aside from being one of nbcs biggest stars, mr. lauer has only slight ties to s.n.l. compared with recent targets like the comedian louis c.k. and senator al franken of minnesota. after mr. moffat departed, beck bennett resurrected his impersonation of president vladimir v. putin of russia, followed by another ghost of mr. trumps past: hillary clinton, played once again by kate mckinnon, and wearing a black robe.

you, donald, have given me the greatest gift of all: sexual gratification in the form of your slow demise, ms. mckinnon said.

the other digs at mr. lauer came later during the weekend update segment.

i almost forgot about this weeks batch of predators, said the co-host colin jost, with a picture behind him of mr. lauer, the hip-hop mogul russell simmons and the radio personality garrison keillor. its just a whole new segment of the news now. youve just got to read the names every week like powerball numbers.

mr. jost followed up: on wednesday, the rockefeller center christmas tree was lit, and so was ann curry, a reference to ms. currys much-publicized exit from the today show in 2012.

brutal song of the week

a digital short titled welcome to hell, featuring this weeks host, saoirse ronan, as well as aidy bryant, cecily strong, kate mckinnon and other female members of the cast, was a searing sendup of the public shock at the flood of powerful men recently accused of sexual misconduct.

all these big, cool, powerful guys are turning out to be  whats the word? habitual predators? ms. bryant said, with lollipops, rainbows and clouds in the background.

now house of cards is ruined, sang ms. ronan. and that really sucks. well, heres a list of stuff thats ruined for us.

advertisement continue reading the main story

parking and walking and uber and ponytails. bathrobes and nighttime and drinking and hotels and vans!

s.n.l. has struggled to find the proper tone to address the spate of sexual misconduct allegations that have dominated the news cycle. some of this has been because of timing. when the harvey weinstein allegations initially broke, it was late in the week and the show shelved a sketch before airtime. a week later, the show aired an uncomfortable sketch riffing off a panel of actresses at the new york film festival discussing mr. weinstein. during an episode in early november, alec baldwin, in the headlines himself for making awkward comments about sexual harassment, cracked jokes as president trump about mr. weinstein.

charming song of the week

try to keep the song by ms. ronan out of your head. the new york-born actresss game attempt to teach the american public how to pronounce her irish name was catchy, amusing and actually useful. previously, ms. ronan has worn a sign on the ellen show that bore a handy guide: hello. my name is sur-sha.

weekend update takes on the tax bill

mr. jost and michael che spent a large portion of weekend update bashing senate republicans for their sweeping tax overhaul and also targeting mr. flynn.

here are some of the quips:

well, the good news for president trump is that his tax plan just passed the senate. the bad news is he might not be president long enough to sign it, mr. jost said. after summarizing mr. flynns guilty plea, he mocked fox newss coverage: or as fox news reported it, did hillary clinton secretly join isis?

on the tax bill, mr. jost said, wow, i knew trump was going to run the country like a business. i just didnt know he was going to run it like one of his businesses.

mr. che went on this riff:

you know, once the republicans get this tax bill passed, they wont need donald trump anymore. i mean, they already got what they wanted. you know, i mean, its like  its not like they like you. dont you think its a little odd that they passed this bill at 2 a.m. without reading it the same night they found out flynn was snitching on you? they know something. its like your family showing up to your hospital room saying, look, you need to sign this will tonight. can i read it first? no time.



sketch of the week

this weeks sketch about a man who is discovered to have a suspicious affection for american girl dolls in the aftermath of a gas line explosion was fairly brilliant. the way mr. days character starts hesitant and evasive before finding himself unable to refrain from expressing his obsession with his doll is a deft arc. the laserlike focus on mr. days peculiar fascination by all the sketchs characters  even in the midst of the explosions debris  was a neat bit of commitment from the writers.

deskside bit of the week

kate mckinnon playing prime minister theresa may of britain was, unsurprisingly, amusing. ms. mckinnon aimed to portray ms. may as a stiff world leader now willing to engage in social media fisticuffs with mr. trump. the escalation from mr. kim jong-un. good sir. do grow up. #please, to telling prince harry, you look like ed sheeran minus the abilities, was a bizarre and worthwhile journey.