in 2011, though, as casinos in atlantic city were losing revenue, voters in new jersey amended its state constitution to allow sports betting, and the state legislature soon passed a law authorizing it. the four major sports leagues successfully challenged the state law as a violation of the federal one.

in 2014, the legislature tried a new approach, partly repealing its existing bans on sports betting to allow it at racetracks and casinos. the leagues again sued and won.

in the supreme court, the federal law faced headwinds.

the citizens of the state of new jersey are bound to obey a law that the state doesnt want but that the federal government compels the state to have, justice anthony m. kennedy said.

he said that crossed a constitutional line and blurred the political accountability of elected officials. the citizen doesnt know, he said. is this coming from the federal government? is this coming from the state government? thats precisely what federalism is designed to prevent.

the supreme court has said that the federal government may not commandeer state resources to achieve federal objectives. on the other hand, the court has said that the federal government may regulate all sorts of things directly and that federal laws pre-empt contrary state laws under the constitutions supremacy clause.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

most of mondays argument in christie v. national collegiate athletic association, no. 16-476, was an effort to decide whether the 1992 law amounted to unconstitutional commandeering or permissible pre-emption.

theodore b. olson, a lawyer for new jersey, said the law was a direct command to the states rather than a federal effort to regulate sports betting.

justice stephen g. breyer proposed a distinction. the federal government can first make a policy determination to regulate an activity, he said. once it makes that determination, it can forbid state laws inconsistent with that determination, he said. thats called pre-emption. what it cannot do, he added, is to tell the state how to legislate.

advertisement continue reading the main story

mr. olson agreed. i wish i had said that myself, justice breyer, he said.

justice elena kagan did not seem fully persuaded, asking whether state officials were required to do anything in particular by the 1992 law. who is being conscripted in order to do what here? she asked.

paul d. clement, a lawyer for the sports leagues and mr. olsons successor as solicitor general in the george w. bush administration, said the 1992 law was part of a set of regulations establishing federal policy. congress in all of these statutes did not want there to be sports gambling schemes operating in interstate commerce, he said.

jeffrey b. wall, a deputy solicitor general who argued in support of the leagues, said new jersey was not entitled to repeal only a part of its law, thereby channeling sports gambling to particular state-preferred providers. he added that the federal government would not object to a wholesale repeal of the state law.

the problem that congress was confronting was state sponsored and sanctioned sports gambling schemes, mr. wall said. it didnt care if i bet with my buddy on the redskins game or we had an office pool. it wasnt going after all sports gambling.

for most of the argument, the lawyers and the justices ignored the potential consequences of a decision striking down the law. toward the end, though, mr. olson noted that billions of dollars were at stake.

nevada has sports betting, and it has it regulated, he said. what im saying is, and all of the evidence supports this, that betting on sports is taking place all over the united states. five percent of it is legal in nevada. the rest of it is illegal. new jersey decided we are going to look at it.