 davis polk & wardwell

 simpson thacher & bartlett (working for aetnas board)

some context: this is the biggest ever deal in the health insurance business, according to thomson reuters. its also the biggest deal agreed to this year, since qualcomm is fighting off broadcoms now-hostile $105 billion takeover bid.

potential riches abound: thomson reuters estimates that the financial advisers on the aetna transaction could split between $120 million and $140 million in fees if the deal is completed.

how will the health care world respond to cvss deal for aetna?

cvs health wants to become a one-stop shop where consumers can find health insurance, community-based clinics that dispense medicine, and data and advice on their prescriptions. or, in the words of cvs chief larry merlo, we think of it as creating a new front door to health care in america.

many analysts and investors expect more consolidation in the wake of the deal. other insurers who tried to sell themselves in recent years, like humana and cigna, could try again. walgreens and walmart could look to duplicate the cvs feat. and perhaps express scripts, the countrys only remaining independent manager of pharmacy benefits, will try to sell itself, though its c.e.o. has said the company hasnt been actively looking.

then there is the question of amazon and what it plans to do in the health care sector.

but one person who worked on the aetna deal told michael j. de la merced that it wasnt clear that others would rush to copy the transaction:

im not sure theres a need for people to replicate this. i would be surprised if there was an immediate reaction, especially from people like unitedhealth who dont like to be seen as reactive.

how the deal came together: though many have speculated that amazon was the primary factor, michael was told that cvs and aetna, in a business partnership for seven years, had been converging anyway when it came to their views on the health care industry. they began formal merger talks within the past two months.

the antitrust angle: remember that this is a so-called vertical merger, combining two companies in adjacent but noncompeting industries. its the same kind of transaction as at&ts $85.4 billion bid for time warner, which the justice department has sued to block.

critics corner

 charley grant writes: cvs health has taken bold action to win back investors. the potential benefits outweigh the serious risks. (heard on the street)

advertisement continue reading the main story

 robert cyran writes, with more than $20 billion of debt on its books, and another $49 billion lined up for the deal, cvs may find fending off amazon puts its own financial health at risk. (breakingviews)

photo

the senate passed its tax overhaul bill. now what?

after persuading every republican senator but bob corker of tennessee to vote in favor of the legislation, the senate majority leader, mitch mcconnell, and his team must now reconcile their plan with the house version. (dont forget: congress needs to pass a stopgap funding measure for the government by late friday or risk a shutdown.)

the flurry of last-minute changes, which democrats loudly criticized, led goldman sachs economists to slightly raise their estimates of how much economic growth the bill would create.

but there are many issues to be sorted out, including the tax rate, whether to make the individual tax cuts permanent, how many tax brackets to have and when the new corporate tax rate should kick in.

an unexpected twist: the senate bill unexpectedly kept the alternative minimum tax for individuals and corporations. that means that companies could lose access to a research and development tax break that is used often by manufacturers, tech concerns and drug makers, according to the wsj.

he said it: what the senate did, in their befuddled mess, is drove me out of business and then bragged about the fact that they got some tax reform passed, robert murray, the c.e.o. of the coal miner murray energy, to the wsj.

how companies plan to spend their tax-cut money

simplifying the tax code will reduce compliance costs and make it possible for job creators to reinvest more of their own money in their enterprises, mitch mcconnell wrote in a wsj op-ed.

but its not always that simple. executives at calportland, which mines limestone to make cement, told the nyt that the company probably wouldnt use the extra cash to immediately hire new workers.

photo

what prompted disney to resume talks to buy parts of fox?

maybe the media giant came back to the negotiating table because it feared that comcast was advancing in talks to buy prime 21st century fox assets like the fox movie studio, cable channels like fx and stakes in the british broadcaster sky and the indian broadcaster star.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the next milestone: the murdoch family is expected to make its decision by the end of the month, michael was told on saturday. if the sale moves forward, it would be an extraordinary breakup of an empire that the murdochs spent decades putting together.

the wild card: would either a comcast bid or a disney bid for fox assets run afoul of antitrust regulators? remember that the justice department has cited the effects of comcasts takeover for nbcuniversal as a major reason for suing to block the time warner deal.

photo

investors still have a fever, and the only prescription is more bitcoin.

its value surged to $11,800 at one point this morning, helped in part by the venezuelan government announcing its interest in starting its own digital currency, to be known as the petro.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story the all-new dealbook newsletter our columnist andrew ross sorkin and his times colleagues help you make sense of major business and policy headlines  and the power-brokers who shape them. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the latest signs of the bitcoin frenzy

 nowhere has the public frenzy over bitcoin been more feverish than in south korea, prompting the prime minister to express his concern. (nyt)

 is it time to think about fedcoin? central banks are increasingly looking at whether they should create digital currencies. (wsj)

 wall street is about to join the fun after the c.f.t.c. gave a green light to plans to introduce bitcoin futures. the futures will be settled by cash so traders wont be getting their hands dirty buying the stuff directly. (barrons)

theres just one issue: no ones using it, the wsj reports.

photo

how robert mueller can hit wall street hard.

take a look at how the s.&p. 500 and the dow jones industrial average moved after michael flynn pleaded guilty and disclosed that he was cooperating with mr. mueller:

photo

wall streets so-called fear gauge  the chicago board options exchange volatility index, or the vix, which measures expectations of how wildly the stock market will swing in the next month  jumped at almost the same time. the spike was the indexs biggest one-day jump since august.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the two stock indexes and the vix calmed down by days end, perhaps because of the senate tax overhauls progress to passage. but expect any future bombshell revelations from mr. mueller to again hit investors in the gut.

photo

china told tech c.e.o.s that it wants to control its internet.

the man who has helped shape president xi jinpings policies has told the world internet conference  whose audience this past weekend included tim cook of apple and sundar pichai of google  that china had a right to regulate its own internet.

but that communist party official, wang huning, added, china stands ready to develop new rules and systems of internet governance to serve all parties and counteract current imbalances.

despite the ongoing concerns about chinas close policing of its online space, mr. cook and chuck robbins of cisco touted their commitment to the country.

extra credit: the wsj reported on how two of chinas top internet companies, alibaba and tencent, help the country spy on its citizens. and china showed off its interest in artificial intelligence, according to the nyt.

photo

the latest in misconduct news.

 after firing matt lauer, nbc maintained that its executives were unaware of his purported sexual misconduct until they heard a detailed complaint that week. (nyt)

 visa fired one of its top executives, jim mccarthy, who handled partnerships, saying his behavior had violated company policy. the memo did not specify why he was dismissed. (recode)

 vice media fired three employees for behavior that included verbal and sexual harassment. one was jason mojica, the head of the documentary films unit. (nyt)

advertisement continue reading the main story

 the hard-edge style of a hollywood lawyer, marty singer, has collided with a sudden cultural shift toward empowering people who speak out against about abuse. (lat)

how to fend off an unwanted takeover bid by 3g capital.

the key, paul polman of unilever told the ft, was that the 3g-backed kraft heinz (where he sits on the board) was making an ill-advised hostile takeover bid.

from scheherazade daneshkhu and lionel barber:

unknown to us at that time, warren wasnt actively involved. with the confidence he has, probably, in those people, he had delegated [the bid] to these people  that would be my best interpretation, says mr. polman. mr. buffett was duly bombarded. warren was approached by probably more people than he expected, says mr. polman, declining to say who did so. as soon as warren discovered that this was a hostile takeover, the tone of the conversation became different.

revolving door

 thomas barkin, a senior executive at mckinsey, has been chosen to lead the federal reserve bank of richmond, va., according to a person familiar with the decision. (bloomberg)

the speed read

 blue aprons new chief executive may be well-paced to patch some of the companys problems, but perhaps no one can fix what looks like an ailing business model. (bloomberg gadfly)

 splitting the job of a chief executive can work, but only if the two bosses are self-effacing, so it makes it hard to imagine co-chief executives running goldman sachs. (ft)

 oracle is bringing a public charter school onto its campus, where employees will be able to mentor students. (nyt)

 units of hna group are stepping up their fund-raising in the local bond market even as borrowing costs soar, adding to the worrisome debt burden of the chinese conglomerate. (bloomberg)

 swiss banks have begun reporting to the swiss money laundering reporting office suspicious account activity among some of their saudi arabian clients, according to people close to the situation. (ft)

advertisement continue reading the main story

each weekday, dealbook reporters in new york and london offer commentary and analysis on the days most important business news. want this in your own email inbox? heres the sign-up.

you can find live updates of dealbook coverage throughout the day at nytimes.com/dealbook.

follow andrew ross sorkin @andrewrsorkin, michael j. de la merced @m_delamerced and amie tsang @amietsang on twitter.

wed love your feedback as we experiment with the writing, format and design of this briefing. please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.