10 things to know about getting into your dream college image credit paula scher

theres no magic formula for getting into a selective college, but over a decade covering admissions for the chronicle of higher education, ive picked up a thing or two. these takeaways, based on hundreds of interviews with admissions deans over the years, may help you navigate the process.

admissions decisions arent all about you.

when colleges choose applicants, theyre juggling competing goals, like increasing diversity and bringing in more revenue. admissions officers arent looking for students who fit just one description  say, those whove earned all as or won the most awards. so dont take rejection personally.

grades and test scores still carry the most weight.

colleges often say they want to get to know the real you, but thats probably true only if your academic accomplishments (and the rigor of courses youve taken) pass muster.

youre more than a number.

after colleges identify a big batch of students with outstanding credentials, differences among them become more important, admissions deans say. among some of the attributes they tell me they would like to see evidence of (in essays, extracurricular activities, recommendations) are: leadership, risk taking, emotional intelligence, fire for learning, critical thinking, curiosity, empathy, optimism, grit, perseverance and the ability to overcome obstacles.

express your authentic self.

overwhelmed by slick, boastful essays, colleges are eager for what they call authentic glimpses of applicants  their experiences, passions and goals. some deans believe theyll get deeper insight through alternative formats like videos, pictures, audio files or documents (an advanced placement english paper, maybe). a handful of prestigious schools, including yale, the university of chicago, pomona college, reed college and the university of rochester, recently introduced this option. as with essays, too much polish is no good, deans say, so you might think twice about hiring a professional videographer. at yale, about 400 applicants (out of nearly 33,000) for this years freshman class sent in something in an alternative format. in at least one case, the submission  a video showing leadership and impact on others  was, the dean told me, a difference maker.

diversity counts.

are you a first-generation or low-income student? many colleges are trying to increase access, so it can help to emphasize your background  and how your personal story relates to your achievements  in essays and interviews. admissions officers are thinking harder about socioeconomic context, such as the quality of an applicants high school, to better understand the opportunities theyve had and the challenges theyve faced.

but money does matter.

at many colleges, financial circumstances comes into play. being able to pay all or some of the freight is a bonus. and some qualified students of limited means might get rejected for no reason other than lack of money.

geography is (partly) destiny.

many selective colleges want students from all over, ideally from all 50 states. last years presidential election illuminated the urban-rural divide, which some colleges have been trying to bridge by paying closer attention to promising applicants from less-populous areas. generally, a northeastern college will look more favorably on an applicant from montana than an equally strong one from the northeast.

legacies arent a shoo-in.

legacy status certainly helps, but big-name colleges reject plenty of these applicants. dont assume mom or dads connections alone will get you in.

do (real) good.

a new initiative called turning the tide urges admissions offices to reward applicants for sustained community service. and some colleges, such as the massachusetts institute of technology, are taking a closer look at what applicants have done to help others, be they neighbors or family members. you dont have to fly to belize to do good (admissions officers are often skeptical of these fleeting trips). showing up to tutor someone at the library each week might be even more impressive, and rewarding.

colleges want to be your first choice.

about one in five colleges allot considerable importance to demonstrated interest, whereby applicants convey their willingness to attend the college theyre applying to. open those emails. connect with admissions officers. let them know when you visit campus. only those who are sure about their first choice and dont need to compare financial aid packages should choose the strongest expression of demonstrated interest: applying early decision, which is binding.









eric hoover is a senior writer at the chronicle of higher education covering admissions.