in a recent study, issi romem, chief economist at buildzoom, a san francisco company that helps people find contractors, looked at the growth of american cities over the past several decades, and found that cities that add a lot of housing do so by expanding outward, building suburbs and exurbs that are almost exclusively covered by single-family homes. once cities stop spreading out, their rate of new housing production slows  and prices shoot upward.

as the population grows, mr. romem said, there are three choices for how to accommodate more people. one is the houston method: keep growing outward. the second is the bay area method: slow down sprawl while leaving existing neighborhoods alone, raising prices and pushing lower-earning households out of state. (in other words, slow growth by forcing people to move to houston.)

the third is what no u.s. city has yet accomplished: grow upward and in place. this route is certainly possible, but, as my story on berkeley shows, it requires a wholesale rethinking of how cities look. and those are brutal politics.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story california today the news and stories that matter to californians (and anyone else interested in the state). sign up to get it by email. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

california online

(please note: we regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)

 dianne feinstein says she is beginning to see a case for obstruction of justice against president trump. [san francisco chronicle]

photo

 rita moreno at the kennedy center honors: some of us have rattled the chains for issues of justice. [the new york times]

 fallout from the republican tax bill: chances are, many state residents will see higher tax bills in years to come. [san francisco chronicle]

advertisement continue reading the main story

 could california be seeing the onset of a recession? [calmatters]

 last year 29 percent of california tenants put more than half their income  before any deductions  toward rent and utilities. [los angeles times]

photo

 the former stanford swimmer brock turner has appealed his sexual assault conviction, saying the encounter was consensual but admitting to imposing trauma and pain on the victim. [the new york times]

 will the pit-bull tactics of martin singer, hollywoods favorite legal hit man, still work in the post-weinstein era? [los angeles times]

photo

 putting a publicly funded charter school on the campus of a tech giant is a new twist on the evolving relationship between big tech companies and schools. [the new york times]

 the wine country fires that burned through the upper sonoma valley in october transfigured multimillion-dollar views that inspired writers like jack london and michael ondaatje and made it one of the regions most prized destinations. [the press democrat]

 san francisco could become the first city in the nation to open a public bank, partly because it would assist in processing cannabis transactions that most commercial banks dont want to touch. [san francisco examiner]

 in jimmy garoppolos debut, the 49ers won a last-minute 15-14 victory over chicago, raising hopes of a turnaround of the dismal season. [mercury news / sacramento bee]

 at disneyland hundreds wait in line, then another line, to buy a $12.99 candy cane  heres why. [daily breeze]

advertisement continue reading the main story

coming up this week

 a year after the ghost ship warehouse fire in oakland, a preliminary hearing opens monday in the trial of two tenants, derick almena and max harris. a judge at the alameda county superior court will decide whether there is enough evidence to proceed with the case.

 king tides will peak monday and tuesday, causing flood warnings for coastal regions.

 the high-flying los angeles rams and philadelphia eagles will meet on sunday at the coliseum, a battle between qbs jared goff, no. 1 in the 2016 draft, and carson wentz, no. 2 in the same draft.

and finally ...

what began 14 years ago as a small and underground cannabis judging competition has morphed into a woodstock of weed attended by tens of thousands of marijuana growers and enthusiasts. the emerald cup runs this saturday and sunday at the sonoma county fairgrounds.

the cannabis is judged by its color, smell, chemical makeup, taste, vibrancy and how it affects ones consciousness, says the emerald cup website. the judging gets harder every year, the organizers say.

in addition to the awards ceremony, which takes place on sunday, there is live music and a series of seminars, including one titled, safe and effective use of cannabis for dogs and cats.

this years emerald cup is taking place as california counts down to the introduction of recreational marijuana sales in january.

california today goes live at 6 a.m. pacific time weekdays. tell us what you want to see: catoday@nytimes.com.

california today is edited by julie bloom, who grew up in los angeles and graduated from u.c. berkeley.