dr. liza johannesson, a uterus transplant surgeon who left the swedish team to join baylors group, said the birth in dallas was particularly important because it showed that success was not limited to the hospital in gothenburg.

photo

to make the field grow and expand and have the procedure come out to more women, it has to be reproduced, she said, adding that within hours of baylors announcement, advocacy groups for women with uterine infertility from all over the world had contacted her to express their excitement at the news.

it was a very exciting birth, dr. johannesson said. ive seen so many births and delivered so many babies, but this was a very special one.

at baylor, eight women have had transplants, including the new mother, in a clinical trial designed to include 10 patients. one recipient is pregnant, and two others  one of whom received her transplant from a deceased donor  are trying to conceive. four other transplants failed after the surgery, and the organs had to be removed, said dr. giuliano testa, principal investigator of the research project and surgical chief of abdominal transplantation.

we had a very rough start, and then hit the right path, dr. testa said in a telephone interview. who paid for it in a certain way were the first three women. i feel very thankful for their contribution, more so than i can express.

both dr. johannesson and dr. testa said that a large part of their motivation came from meeting patients and coming to understand how devastated they were to find out that they would not be able to have children.

dr. testa said: i think many men will never understand this fully, to understand the desire of these women to be mothers. what moved all of us is to see the mother holding her baby, when she was told, you will never have it.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the transplants are now experimental, with much of the cost covered by research funds. but they are expensive, and if they become part of medical practice, will probably cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. it is not clear that insurers will pay, and dr. testa acknowledged that many women who want the surgery will not be able to afford it.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

another hospital, the cleveland clinic, performed the first uterus transplant in the united states in february 2016, but it failed after two weeks because of an infection that caused life-threatening hemorrhage and required emergency surgery to remove the organ. the clinic halted its program for an extended period, but has restarted it and has patients awaiting transplants, a spokeswoman, victoria vinci, said.

the woman who gave birth at baylor was the fourth to receive a transplant there, in september 2016.

the process is complicated and has considerable risks for both recipients and donors. donors undergo a five-hour operation that is more complex and takes out more tissue than a standard hysterectomy to remove the uterus. the transplant surgery is also difficult, in some ways comparable to a liver transplant, dr. testa said.

recipients face the risks of surgery and anti-rejection drugs for a transplant that they, unlike someone with heart or liver failure, do not need to save their lives. their pregnancies are considered high-risk, and the babies have to be delivered by cesarean section to avoid putting too much strain on the transplanted uterus. so far all the births have occurred a bit earlier than the normal 40 weeks of gestation  at 32 to 36 weeks.

women who have transplants cannot conceive the natural way, because their ovaries are not connected to the uterus, so there is no way for an egg to get in there. instead, they need in vitro fertilization. before the transplant, women are given hormone treatments to make their ovaries release multiple eggs, which are then harvested, fertilized and frozen.

once the woman has fully recovered from surgery and begun menstruating, the eggs can be implanted in the uterus, one at a time, until she becomes pregnant.

in sweden, doctors waited a year after the transplant before trying to start a pregnancy, to allow the women time to heal. at baylor, the team moved much faster, and began trying to impregnate the women within a few months of the surgery, soon after they began menstruating.

dr. testa said it was his idea to start the pregnancies earlier, because the women were young and healthy, and did not need a year to bounce back from surgery. he argued that the waiting time just kept them on anti-rejection drugs  which have significant side effects  for longer than necessary.

we went shorter, he said. i think we were right.

he and dr. johannesson said the swedish team, and other centers planning transplants, had also begun to consider shortening the wait.