the conversation between mr. flynn and mr. kislyak about the security council resolution clearly falls within the logan acts scope. the obama administration, frustrated with israeli settlement activity, had chosen not to use its veto to block the measure. mr. flynns overture to russia was thus an attempt to countermand the current administrations decision regarding a highly sensitive foreign policy subject.

the following week, mr. flynn asked mr. kislyak not to escalate the situation in response to american sanctions against russia in retaliation for meddling in the 2016 election. the effort to persuade russia to respond moderately to american sanctions appears to be a less egregious logan act violation  because it was not an effort to defeat obama administration policy  but it too falls within the acts prohibition on trying to influence a foreign government in a dispute with the united states.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

in response to the flynn plea and questions about the logan act, president trumps lawyer, ty cobb, said that the statute doesnt apply to transition team members. but that claim is surely false. a president-elect and his team may certainly introduce themselves to foreign leaders and conduct discussions with them about foreign policy. but there is a wide gap between those activities and trying to persuade a foreign power to thwart the sitting presidents foreign operations and initiatives. the former is not prohibited by the logan act; the latter is flatly banned.

some commentators have suggested that the logan act is a dead letter under a legal doctrine known as desuetude, which holds that a law can become unenforceable after a lengthy period of disuse. only two people have ever been indicted under the statute, and neither of those indictments resulted in a conviction.

however, no federal court has ever refused to enforce a law because of desuetude. in 1964, a federal district court specifically held that the logan act remains valid. quoting shakespeares measure for measure, the court said of the statute: the law hath not been dead, though it hath slept. and the supreme court referred to the statute as recently as 1991.

others have argued that the logan act cannot be enforced because it violates the first amendments free speech clause. but the supreme court rejected a similar argument in a 2010 case called holder v. humanitarian law project.

the court held that the freedom of speech must give way to a federal statute banning material support for foreign terrorist groups. the courts rationale  that citizens do not have an absolute first amendment right to aid a foreign entity adverse to united states interests  would seem to apply regardless of whether the entity is a terrorist group or an often-hostile foreign state.

advertisement continue reading the main story

why, then, have so few cases been brought under the law? often prosecutors do not bother to bring cases against defendants whose wrongdoing poses little danger. very few private citizens have any hope of persuading a foreign country to change its united nations votes. mr. flynn, however, was no ordinary private citizen but the incoming national security adviser. he would soon be in a position to reward russia for cooperating with the trump transition team.

another reason that few cases have been brought under the logan act may be that citizens who conspire to thwart united states foreign policy rarely do so in the open. richard nixon, as a candidate during the 1968 campaign, almost certainly violated the statute when he sought to sabotage the johnson administrations peace overtures to north vietnam, but details of mr. nixons effort did not emerge until after his death.

nixon did it, never much of an excuse for a president, thus doesnt work here. indeed, mr. nixons sabotage of the peace talks illustrates the importance of the statute and the potentially dire consequences of its violation.

if mr. flynn violated the logan act, then so did the very senior official who directed his actions. if that official is mr. kushner, then mr. kushner could go to jail. if it is mr. pence or mr. trump, then impeachment proceedings could be in order. to be sure, the republican-controlled congress, not mr. mueller, decides who to impeach. but if the phrase high crimes or misdemeanors means anything, it includes violation of a serious criminal statute that bars citizens from undermining the foreign policy actions of the sitting president.