city ballet issued a similar statement, which said, in part, the ongoing inquiry has not substantiated the allegations.

reached by telephone on monday, mr. martins said in response to the accusations, the company has already addressed it. asked if he had anything to add, he said, at this point, no.

the two organizations have retained a lawyer, barbara hoey, to conduct the investigation. ms. hoey, the chairwoman of kelley dryes labor and employment practice group, declined to comment.

as part of the investigation, mr. martins is believed to have discussed romantic relationships he has had with female dancers, according to a former official at city ballet with knowledge of the investigation who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter.

rob daniels, a spokesman for city ballet, said that since 2010 it has had a policy precluding a reporting relationship between a supervisor and subordinate where a romantic relationship exists.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

along those lines, jed bernstein was forced out last year as president of lincoln center  which has such a policy  after an anonymous complaint revealed that he had been involved in a consensual relationship with a woman who worked for him, and whom he had twice promoted.

advertisement continue reading the main story

in recent interviews, two former city ballet dancers and three former students at the school described a culture in which mr. martins was known for sleeping with dancers, some of whom received better roles because of their personal relationships with him.

the world of ballet is a fuzzy area, those involved say, in which people are regularly touching one another through choreography and instruction. an artistic leader like mr. martins looms large  particularly among up-and-coming, young dancers  as a producer who decides which ballets are performed; as a casting director who determines which dancers land the best parts; and as a father figure who designates dancers for promotion.

balanchine, who was known as mr. b, wielded tremendous power over the lives of the dancers in his company. he famously discouraged female dancers from marriage and from having children; he insisted that their boyfriends leave them at the stage door  not enter the theater  and that each dancer wear a different perfume so that he could easily identify them.

in a 2012 article on balanchine in psychology tomorrow, wilhelmina frankfurt, a former city ballet dancer, said: the only way that peter rivaled mr. b. was as a casanova. however, where mr. b. was charm incarnate, peter was a basher.

in 1992, mr. martins was charged with third-degree assault against his wife, darci kistler, then a principal dancer in the company. ms. kistler told the police that her arms and legs had been cut and bruised. the misdemeanor charge was later dropped.

in 2011, mr. martins was arrested on new years day and charged with driving while intoxicated.

mr. martins was a star of the royal danish ballet in copenhagen when he joined city ballet in 1970. in 1983, he became co-ballet master in chief with jerome robbins, taking over that role entirely in 1990.