search the internet for research on the impact of puzzle-solving on the brain, and youll find plenty of studies. but the results are mixed, and its not clear whether puzzle solving has any purely physiological benefits.

the psychological benefits, though, are not in question.

when you do a puzzle, the mind becomes completely absorbed in the task at hand, said joanne cohen-katz, a psychologist in allentown, pa. there is total focus on what is happening in the moment, which is the definition of mindfulness. and we know that mindfulness results in all sorts of positive changes in the brain.

for one, solving a crossword can be a path to serenity in a world of uncertainty.

i dont think i have to sell you on the increased demand for this type of pastime in an increasingly worried world, wrote margaret farrar, the first crossword editor of the times, in a memo to lester markel, the sunday editor, after the pearl harbor attack. you cant think of your troubles while solving a crossword.

in recent interviews, new york times crossword enthusiasts shared their emotional connections to the pastime and described the value they find in the exercise.

harry hassell, of jackson heights, queens, remembered his mother working on crosswords. amid the chaos of the household, it allowed her a personal pleasure and a routine all her own, he said. it also allowed me to see her not just as a car-pooling, tennis-playing mother, but also as a clever, intelligent, word-loving woman.

photo

such intergenerational connections, forged over black-and-white grids, can have long-term implications.

advertisement continue reading the main story

i first started doing crosswords as a child while visiting my grandma pat, said neil padrick wilson, a claims analyst in tacoma, wash. she would sit at the big dining room table, dipping toast in her coffee. i would dip toast in my hot chocolate and we would work through a puzzle together. it got me to think, it got me to learn and it got me to know her better.

puzzles became so important to mr. wilson that he began to create them, and a crossword he made recently ran in the times.

while not all enthusiasts go on to construct puzzles, its not uncommon for an early habit to persist.

rituals are often key in bonding with others, particularly family rituals, said ray bepko, a clinical psychologist in clinton, n.y. pastimes and hobbies are very much a part of this and impact our adult relationships.

that seems to be at least one reason people continue or develop a solving habit in adulthood, dr. bepko said. accessing this deep emotional connection is a source of comfort and reassurance anytime, particularly in difficult moments.

of course, puzzles are games, and theyre meant to be fun  especially in the addictive aha! moments that many solvers describe.

i feel klutzy while im doing it, said sharon weinstein, a times puzzle solver from north potomac, md. but afterward theres a great sensation of satisfaction.