were worried and were wondering what are we going to tell our kids, said cynthia metcalf, who lives with her husband and the youngest of their four children in mount kisco, an affluent commuter town. i just feel like its an attack deliberately set against people from the northeast or from other blue states.

relying more on salt deductions taxpayers in new york county (manhattan) take the highest average deduction for state and local deductions, known as salt, on their federal tax returns. and among the top 12 counties in the united states, half are in the greater new york metropolitan area. share who take salt deductions avg. salt deduction* county state 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. new york san mateo marin san francisco westchester fairfield santa clara pitkin teton nassau essex bergen n.y. calif. calif. calif. n.y. conn. calif. colo. wyo. n.y. n.j. n.j. $60,400 39,300 38,200 35,000 34,300 33,400 32,200 27,000 26,100 23,900 23,700 23,700 45 44 51 39 47 45 43 35 30 50 35 46 %

ms. metcalf, who teaches history at westchester community college, said she had tried to use turbotax software to estimate how their tax returns would be affected. currently, they can deduct the more than $20,000 a year they pay in school and town taxes, and the 7 percent of their income that goes to state taxes. losing those deductions means the family could wind up paying considerably more, ms. metcalf said.

that prospect has the metcalfs rethinking their financial future. ms. metcalf said she dreaded the prospect of telling her youngest child, genevieve, a high school senior, that the college of her choice was beyond their means. and she said she and her husband might have to accelerate plans to relocate once all their children have left home. then again, she added, selling their home could become more difficult.

now im starting to think, whos going to want to buy our house here in new york? ms. metcalf said. the whole game has shifted.

indeed it has, and not just for homeowners. the tax plan would probably cut taxes for most new yorkers, at least in the short term. but it has several provisions that local leaders said could pose long-term problems for new york and other urban areas. mayor bill de blasio, in an interview on monday, estimated that 700,000 new yorkers would pay more in taxes in the near term.

the human impact is huge, mr. de blasio said, referring both to the higher taxes some residents would pay and to the services that could be cut as a result of the tax plan. he said his administration had tried for four years to make one of the worlds most expensive cities more affordable by providing public prekindergarten and paid sick leave. and then along comes the federal government and makes the situation worse, he said.

gov. andrew m. cuomo of new york, who joined gov. jerry brown of california and new jerseys governor-elect, philip d. murphy, on a call with reporters on monday, called the bill a targeted assault on their states.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the versions of the bill passed by the house and the senate have significant differences, which will have to be resolved in a conference committee before the bill can land on president trumps desk. the house bill has several provisions that could be especially bad for new york, including the elimination of a kind of tax-exempt bonds that many cities have used for affordable-housing projects. the senate bill doesnt include that change, but it does partly maintain the alternative minimum tax, which is aimed at limiting deductions for high earners and therefore disproportionately affects the new york area.

photo

parts of the bills could be good for new york. most significantly, the corporate tax cuts contained in both the house and senate versions would most likely be a boon to new yorks financial sector. that could mean higher returns for investors and bigger bonuses for wall street traders  which, in turn, could mean more spending at shops and restaurants and more sales-tax revenue for the city and state.

still, most experts said there was little doubt the bills would be bad for certain state and local budgets, and for the regional economy.

its not going to be good, i think thats clear, said michael p. jacobson, who leads the institute for state and local governance at the city university of new york. and it might well be devastating.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the most damaging elements could take years to play out. the bill would add more than $1 trillion to the deficit over a decade, according to congresss official scorekeeper. under a 2010 law, the increased deficit would force automatic spending cuts to medicare and other programs, many of which new york and other cities rely on to help their poorest residents.

the most immediate threat could be to the regions housing market. the tax bill would eliminate or make less valuable the tax breaks that encourage homeownership. that would probably have a minor impact on home prices nationally, but potentially a big one in the new york area, with its expensive homes and high property taxes.

an analysis of the senate bill by moodys analytics concluded that home prices in manhattan could fall nearly 10 percent in the coming years because of the bill. some new york and new jersey suburbs could be even more vulnerable because property-tax rates are higher there and prices are still recovering from the bursting of the housing bubble.

there could also be broader effects. driving up new yorks already high tax burden could undermine the regions competitiveness by making it harder for businesses to recruit and retain skilled workers, said kathryn s. wylde, president and chief executive of the partnership for new york city, a leading business group.

photo

its our scientists, our entertainers, our teachers, top professors, employees of cultural institutions  its a talent issue, ms. wylde said. its the entrepreneurs who decide not to locate their company here.

advertisement continue reading the main story

for the wealthiest new yorkers, meanwhile, the loss of the deduction for state and local taxes means they could face a combined tax rate above 50 percent on their income

already, many wealthy new yorkers try to spend enough time outside the city to avoid paying income taxes as state residents, and economists warn that the tax bill could accelerate that trend. goldman sachs recently estimated that the loss of the state and local tax deduction could eventually lower the number of high-earning new york city residents by 2 to 4 percent.

it wouldnt take a mass exodus to have a significant impact on state and local budgets. according to the citys independent budget office, fewer than 40,000 new yorkers accounted for 45 percent of taxable income in new york city in 2014.

even if most rich new yorkers stay put, local politicians could find it harder to raise taxes to pay for services. mr. de blasio, for example, has called for a tax on millionaires to help fix the citys subway system. mr. murphy, the new jersey governor-elect, wants a similar tax for public schools.

without the state and local tax deduction, those plans could face more opposition. already, top democratic lawmakers in new jersey have hinted they might back away from supporting mr. murphys millionaire tax if the deduction is repealed.

three decades ago, new yorkers defeated a similar effort to repeal the state and local tax deduction by rallying opposition from local officials across the country, said jay kriegel, who helped lead that lobbying effort on behalf of local business leaders. the breakneck pace of the latest tax bill left little time for a similar approach.

perhaps the biggest difference between 85 and 2017 is the speed at which these people have worked, mr. kriegel said. there has not been time to have a serious discussion.