under a law passed in 1995, the president has to sign a national security waiver every six months to keep the embassy in tel aviv, and that deadline expired monday. the white house said mr. trump took no action on monday, but would announce his decision soon.

the president has been clear on this issue from the get-go that its not a matter of if, but a matter of when, the deputy press secretary, hogan gidley, told reporters.

mr. trump, officials said, is expected to sign the waiver but couple it with recognition of jerusalem as the capital  a move that the white house hopes will mollify evangelicals and other staunchly pro-israel supporters.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

mr. macrons objections are hardly a surprise. european leaders agree that jerusalems status should be decided in a peace negotiation. france nourishes its own ambitions as a peacemaker: it played host to a middle east peace conference shortly before mr. trump took office.

one influential country that has not weighed in on the possible shift in american policy is saudi arabia. that is surprising given that jerusalem is home to the aqsa mosque, and that the saudi king holds the title of custodian of islams two other holiest mosques, in mecca and medina.

the silence from riyadh is deafening, said aaron david miller, a former middle east peace negotiator now at the wilson center. either they know the president wont issue a statement or theyre privy to some initiative, of which the jerusalem gambit is a part.

the saudi crown prince, mohammed bin salman, is close to mr. trump and his son-in-law, jared kushner, who is running the administrations peace initiative. diplomats in the region have been buzzing that the crown prince recently presented the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, with the outlines of an american plan  something the saudis and the white house deny.

mr. macron has also developed a good relationship with mr. trump, particularly since he invited the president to paris last july for bastille day celebrations. but the two leaders are far apart on issues like climate change and the iran nuclear deal.

some experts say mr. trump will find it impossible to square his campaign promise with his goal of brokering the ultimate deal between israelis and palestinians.

advertisement continue reading the main story

you cant either move the embassy or even declare jerusalem the capital without driving the palestinians away from the negotiating table, and winning them the support of the arabs in doing so, said daniel c. kurtzer, a former american ambassador to israel and egypt.