ms. bernsteins lawyers, neil mullin and nancy erika smith, have been vocal critics of the use of nondisclosure agreements and nondisparagement clauses to silence victims of harassment. they represented the former fox news host gretchen carlson in her july 2016 suit claiming she was harassed by the networks founding chairman, roger ailes. in the wake of the lawsuit, issues of sexual harassment at fox news burst into public view.

knowing ms. bernstein and mr. oreillys other victims are afraid to speak out because he and fox forced them to sign nondisclosure agreements, oreilly and fox have made false and disparaging claims, mr. mullin said in a statement. they should release all victims from their ndas and let the truth out. it is cowardly to publicly attack these women knowing they have been subjected to contractual provisions requiring absolute silence.

fredric s. newman, a lawyer for mr. oreilly, said in a statement that mr. oreilly had never mentioned ms. bernsteins name publicly in any context.

as the original new york times story makes clear, this was absolutely not a case of sexual harassment, mr. newman said. so todays lawsuit has absolutely no merit, and mr. oreilly will respond aggressively in court.

a spokesman for 21st century fox, the parent company of fox news, declined to comment.

ms. bernstein, in her lawsuit, said that she had reached a settlement with fox news and mr. oreilly in july 2002 after she made repeated complaints about his behavior to the networks human resources department and other executives. the agreement included a confidentiality clause, which barred both sides from talking about the dispute, as well as a nondisparagement clause.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the new york times reported on ms. bernsteins settlement in april as part of an investigation that exposed how the network had stood by mr. oreilly as he faced a series of harassment allegations. the times reported that the network was aware of complaints involving mr. oreilly since at least 2002, when, current and former employees who witnessed the incident said, he stormed into the newsroom and screamed at ms. bernstein. ms. bernstein soon left the network.

the exact amount of ms. bernsteins settlement was not known, but it was far less than the five other publicly known settlements involving mr. oreilly. the six settlements have totaled about $45 million, including one for $32 million.

in her suit, ms. bernstein said she was not the source of the information printed in the times article.

advertisement continue reading the main story

ms. bernstein claims that statements made by mr. oreilly and fox news in response to the article disparaged and defamed her and violated the confidentiality clause of the settlement, which required that if asked about the dispute, the parties could respond by stating, the matter has been resolved (or settled).

oreilly portrayed himself as a target and claimed that complaints against him are extortionate, ms. bernsteins lawsuit said. this is false. in fact, he is a serial abuser and ms. bernsteins complaints about him were far from extortionate.

ms. bernstein said fox news had made a deliberately misleading statement by stating that no current or former fox news employee ever used a hotline to report complaints about mr. oreilly. she said that there was no hotline at fox news during her employment and that she had repeatedly complained to the human resources department at fox news, as well as other executives, about mr. oreillys behavior.

this cynical falsehood about a nonexistent hotline was made to bolster oreillys claim that the women who received settlements must have fabricated their claims or they would have complained, ms. smith said in a statement. but ms. bernstein did complain. there is ample evidence that fox news, with the complicity of top executives, enabled the abuse of women for many years, then silenced them nondisclosure agreements and nondisparagement clauses.

in the suit, ms. bernstein said she had suffered reputational harm, emotional distress, physical sickness and loss of income as a result of the statements made by mr. oreilly and fox news.