photo

monday puzzle  todays puzzle by kevin christian has a note on it that says that the print version has a visual element that was not able to be reproduced for the online and app versions.

the puzzle is solvable either way, but the visuals make things easier and, this being a monday puzzle, thats what were here for, right? the addition of the visuals definitely make this a monday. without them, you can still get the theme, but it might not grow on you, so to speak, until you get to the bottom of the puzzle.

if you would like to see the visuals, ive put them here.

todays theme

what do the six actors in the films in mr. christians theme have in common? mullets! they all wore their hair in the mullet hairstyle during the filming of the movies in the clues. (hi, kids! ask your folks about their business in the front, party in the back hair. demand to see photos.)

mr. christian, who is a very nice man, is kind enough to remind us of this embarrassing period in our lives, when so many men  and some women  wore their hair this way that is was briefly declared the state haircut of new jersey [thats not even remotely true.  ed.]

thats our theme today: hair regret.

tricky clues

honestly, i was so distracted by the mullet flashbacks that i didnt notice if there were any difficult clues. all i can say is, make sure you know your root beers. it comes up twice today.

constructor notes

the mullet is the greatest hairstyle ever invented. it is the greatest hairstyle ever invented because it makes a man look like a lion. what man wouldnt want to look like a lion? lions are awesome. theyre the kings of the jungle. thats why mullets are awesome. i used to have a mullet. im 53 years old. that means i was born in 1964. that means i was between the ages of 16 and 26 during the 80s. of course i rocked a mullet. in fact, i have a photo of myself from 1987 where i have a mullet and a giant zz top beard. top that. i shaved it when i returned from 4-1/2 months in europe and had to get a real job. i remember when my mullet disappeared. it was not of my own choosing. i would go to get my hair cut, and i would say, i want it short on the sides and long in the back. how hard is that to understand? not very hard. however, i noticed as the years went by, the hairstylists ignored me. they didnt leave it long in the back. it kept getting shorter and shorter in the back. i was so sad. perhaps the hairstylists were trying to save me from myself. on a crossword note  i have a version of this grid that has joe dirt and chappie across the middle instead of rambo. thats one more theme answer and nine more theme letters. i went with the rambo version instead because it has cleaner fill. plus, i didnt want to lose rambo. who doesnt love sylvester stallone in a mullet? we all love sylvester stallone in a mullet. all other mullets pale in comparison.

your hair? im sorry, your thoughts?