julie m. kern and andrew n. radford at the university of bristol study social communication and they wanted to know how new mongooses functioned as sentinels and how the information they conveyed while on sentinel duty was received by the rest of the group.

so they monitored their behavior, how often they stood guard emitting a surveillance call that means, im on duty here. 

new arrivals generally did less sentinel duty than long-term group members, perhaps because of the physical drain of immigration. it may take several months for a mongoose that leaves its group to find another group that will accept it.

video

the researchers, or, actually the 24 research assistants that the researchers make a point of thanking in their paper in current biology, observed the south african mongooses and gathered data over several years. they also recorded and played back surveillance calls from different mongooses to judge how the other mongooses responded.

the reaction of group members was different and changed over time. and at first foragers did not show a lot of confidence in immigrants. they would stay vigilant when foraging, looking up frequently to check their surroundings. if a known group member was sending out surveillance calls, however, foragers were more relaxed, keeping their head down.

even among well-known sentinels there were differences, dr. kern said. the members of the dominant pair were much more trusted than other mongooses.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

however, by the time five months had passed the immigrants were trusted just as much as any other group member.

the reason that mongooses bother to switch groups, said dr. kern, is to get a better chance at reproduction. if youre quite far down the hierarchy in one group, she said, you may try to join a group that has fewer individuals of your sex. then you have a better chance of one day becoming one of the dominant pair.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the biggest threat to reaching a position of dominance is predation. that is to say, being eaten before you get a chance to reproduce.

the findings show that mongooses dont just take a sentinels call at face value. they know who is making the surveillance signal and they consider the source. a dominant group member on duty makes them more relaxed. a new immigrant on duty is not as reassuring.

the comparisons, of course, are tempting. how long before we trust the new arrivals? but, really, these are mongooses, and they are reacting to one new arrival at a time. about the only conclusion that applies to both mongooses and people is that all social animals must cope with new members joining the group. whats at stake and how the groups deal with it depends n all sorts of factors, not least of which is the nature of the social animal.

anyone want a bite of this scorpion?