does trump have authority to supervise law enforcement decisions and fire subordinates?

yes. but courts have ruled that otherwise lawful acts can constitute obstruction of justice if done with corrupt intentions. in a 1998 case, for example, an appeals court upheld the conviction of a lawyer who had filed legal complaints and related motions against a government agent who was investigating an illegal gambling operation. the court ruled that the defendants nominally litigation-related conduct was unlawful because his real motive was to safeguard his personal financial interests in the corrupt enterprise.

julie osullivan, a former federal prosecutor who now teaches white-collar criminal law at georgetown university, said the power relationship between a president and the f.b.i. director could elevate a request to shut down a case into an act that amounts to impeding an official investigation.

what is the argument that a president cannot commit obstruction of justice?

as a preliminary matter, there is no precedent for prosecuting a current or former president in criminal court for that offense. and several legal commentators have defended mr. trump by claiming that a president cannot be prosecuted for obstruction of justice because article ii of the constitution gives the president authority to supervise and control the executive branch, including law enforcement decisions and personnel.

one version of this argument is that mr. trump cannot be charged in court with a crime because the judicial branch should not be in the position of second-guessing whether a president has properly exercised his constitutional authority, so the only remedy for abuse of power is impeachment and removal by congress.

on monday, alan dershowitz, a harvard law school professor and criminal defense attorney, went even further on fox news fox & friends, suggesting that it might not even be a legitimate basis for impeachment. mr. trump endorsed that clip as a must watch on twitter.

i think if congress ever were to charge him with obstruction of justice for exercising his constitutional authority under article ii, wed have a constitutional crisis, mr. dershowitz said. you cannot charge a president with obstruction of justice for exercising his constitutional power to fire comey and to tell the justice department who to investigate and who not to investigate.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

what is the argument that a president can commit obstruction of justice?

both american presidents who were subjected to impeachment proceedings in the last century  bill clinton in 1998, for suborning perjured testimony, and richard m. nixon in 1974, for trying to stop the watergate investigation  were accused of obstruction of justice by congress.

other legal commentators maintained that the constitution does not give presidents the power to abuse their supervisory powers by exercising them for an improper purpose  like to cover up a crime.

advertisement continue reading the main story

this becomes a kind of the king can do no harm argument, which just isnt consistent with american criminal law or constitutional law, said samuel buell, a duke law school professor and former federal prosecutor.

does mr. trumps tweet strengthen a hypothetical obstruction case?

obstruction of justice cases often come down to whether prosecutors can prove defendants mental state when they committed the act. it is not enough to show that a defendant knew the act would have a side consequence of impeding an investigation; achieving that obstruction has to have been the specific intention. the question is whether mr. trumps tweet about why he fired mr. flynn  even if it could be shown that despite mr. dowds account, mr. trump did write it or approve it  bolsters that case.

mr. buell said it did, but he also suggested that critics of mr. trump were overreacting to mr. trumps twitter post  because, he said, if one believes mr. comeys account, then there was already significant evidence that mr. trump was acting with an improper purpose.

the conversation with comey back in the spring is enough to show that trump thought flynn had at least serious potential for criminal exposure, he said. so if he also knew more detail about flynn having lied in the f.b.i. interview, it just adds weight. it doesnt suddenly put everything in a different light.

what about impeachment?

asking fbi to drop an investigation is obstruction of justice, representative ted deutch, democrat of florida, said on twitter after the initial report of the oval office conversation about mr. flynn. obstruction of justice is an impeachable offense.

while it can be a murky task in court to interpret the obstruction statutes, said david sklansky, a former federal prosecutor who teaches at stanford, impeachment proceedings are different. they are a quasi-judicial, quasi-political process, he noted; the house and the senate determine for themselves whether the standards are met.

in other words, as a practical matter, the constitutions standards for impeachment and removal of a president  if he has committed treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors  are met by anything that a majority of the house and two-thirds of the senate are willing to vote for.

that makes prognostication an exercise in vote counting, not legal analysis. as presently constituted, the republican-controlled congress has shown little appetite for removing mr. trump from office.