photo

the shape of water is partly a code-scrambled fairy tale, partly a genetically modified monster movie, and altogether wonderful. guillermo del toro, the writer and director, is a passionate genre geek. sometimes his enthusiasm can get the better of his discipline, producing misshapen (but never completely uninteresting) movies like pacific rim and crimson peak. at his best, though  in the devils backbone, pans labyrinth and now, at last, again  he fuses a fans ardor with a romantic sensibility that is startling in its sincerity. he draws on old movies, comic books, mythic archetypes and his own restless visual imagination to create movies that seem less made than discovered, as if he had plucked them from the cultural ether and given them color, voice and form.

the most obvious reference point for the shape of water is creature from the black lagoon, a cold war-era camp-horror classic about a strange beast, quasi-fish and sort-of human, discovered in the rain forests of the amazon. in mr. del toros update, such a creature is brought to baltimore in the early 1960s and kept in a tank at a government research lab, where he is subjected to brutal torture in the name of science and national security.

video

the asset, as his minders call him, poses no threat to anyone. he is, as wild things tend to be in movies nowadays, an innocent at the mercy of a ruthlessly predatory species, which is to say us. his particular nemesis is richard strickland, a government-issue, square-jawed square played with reliable menace by michael shannon. strickland lives in a suburban split-level with his wife and two kids, drives a cadillac, reads the power of positive thinking and is into mechanical missionary sex (and workplace sexual harassment). his favorite accessory is an electric cattle prod, a detail that links him to the southern sheriffs occasionally shown terrorizing civil rights demonstrators on television.

a caricature? maybe. but also a perfectly plausible villain, and in his diabolical all-american normalcy a necessary foil for the films loose rebel coalition, a band of misfits who come to the assets defense. the most important of these is elisa (sally hawkins), a member of the laboratorys nighttime cleaning staff, who plays jazz records for the piscine captive, feeds him hard-boiled eggs and before long falls in love with him.

advertisement continue reading the main story

you may marvel at just how far mr. del toro takes this interspecies romance  all the way, basically  and also at how natural, how un-creepy, how pure and right he makes it seem. and why not? folklore is full of frog princes, beauties and beasts. classical mythology has its satyrs and centaurs, its shape-shifting gods and metamorphosing nymphs, whose commingling and canoodling is part of the human heritage.