pulse festive footwear and other whimsical duds for the holidays this holiday season, consider mens wear with a tinge of humor and whimsy: shirts with satirical prints, jazzy sneakers and peak-a-boo denim. even your dog can get in on the fun with colorful accessories.

image credit tina tyrell

arty

satirical shirts

when sanya kantarovsky, an artist from new york, was invited to exhibit at art basel miami beach, he reunited with george mccracken, a former classmate and fashion designer known for his understated label m-82. the result is a three-piece collection based on a subversive pattern depicting nude men running through a cactus field, and a middle-aged man strangling himself for pleasure.

i like to consider these prints as satirizing male ambition and competitiveness, mr. mccracken said. my own interpretation at first glance is that they look so colorful and seductive. it takes a minute before their weirdness creeps up on me.

mccracken kantarovsky shirts, $800, and jacket, $950, at the tanya leighton gallery booth at art basel miami beach (dec. 6 to 10).

image vans lampin

kicks

tinsel for your toes

bring some holiday cheer to your feet. converses classic chuck taylor all-star high-tops get reworked into glittery color-blocked confections as part of a collaboration with j.w. anderson, the british designer known for his eccentric takes on mens wear staples. despite all the glitter, the sneakers are surprisingly wearable.

and opening ceremony has revamped the classic vans lampin, a retro 1990s skate shoe, with equal parts punk and holiday. green-and-red allover plaids are printed on the canvas uppers as well as the rubber outsoles.

image converse

converse x j.w. anderson, $140, available dec. 14 at converse.com. vans for opening ceremony, $95, at opening ceremony.

image

woof

doggy frills

dont forget fido this holiday. lotuff, an upscale leather goods company in providence, r.i., has a new collection for dogs. the handmade collars and leashes, which are constructed with vegetable-tanned leather, come in a variety of sizes and colors to fit any breed. solid brass hardware and leather linings help prevent stretching. and the pieces are handsome enough to go from the dog park to sunday brunch.

lotuff leather collars and leashes, $150 ($200 with monogram), at lotuffleather.com.

image

bookish

literary plaid

jeffrey costello and rob tagliapietra, the fashion bears once known for their namesake womens wear label, are back with plaid. for the holidays, their new label, jcrt, created five custom shirts inspired by classic book jackets including the little prince (cobalt blue and yellow paid) and patti smiths just kids (black and gray plaid).

the pairings were assembled by aaron hicklin, a magazine editor and founder of one grand books, a boutique bookstore that showcases the reading lists of celebrity bibliophiles. the shirts can be purchased individually or with their matching titles.

jcrt x one grand books holiday capsule shirts, $125 ($145.95 with book), at blackbarn chelsea market and jc-rt.com.

image

cheeky

conceptual denim

the young british designer craig green has drawn praise for his bold sculptural shapes and abstracted utilitarian lines. his latest offering is more democratic: denim. putting his conceptual spin on the humble fabric, mr. green designed a straight-legged jean, vest, bucket hat and jean jacket  all with a revealing porthole.

it kind of has a function without it actually doing anything, mr. green said. i thought it was interesting that on the jeans it shows your underwear, almost as if the circle changes along with your underwear.

craig green denim, $290 to $675, available this month at bergdorf goodman and dover street market new york.

continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on facebook (styles and modern love), twitter (styles, fashion and weddings) and instagram.

sign up for the open thread newsletter a look from across the new york times at the forces that shape the dress codes we share, with vanessa friedman as your personal shopper. see sample please verify youre not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * required field you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times products and services. thank you for subscribing. view all new york times newsletters. an error has occurred. please try again later. you are already subscribed to this email. view all new york times newsletters. sign up