this criminal syndicate is run out of north koreas mysterious office 39, a bureau that, according to the treasury department, provides critical support to north korean leadership in part through engaging in illicit economic activities. every cog of the nations machinery is mobilized to facilitate the regimes racketeering: defectors have described schoolchildren working in poppy fields; they say cash and smuggled goods are brought in on state-owned merchant vessels; and diplomats peddle heroin. crime is north koreas national industry.

as in any organized crime entity, the underbosses keep mr. kims regime afloat. their loyalty has been bought and paid for with lavish wealth and privilege. so far, these crime bosses have been masterful at circumventing the sanctions that have primarily hurt the enslaved north korean population.

thats why the united states and its allies ought to take a page from an israeli playbook and wage financial warfare against mr. kim and his cabal.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the notion behind using money as a weapon against terrorism belonged to meir dagan, a legendary soldier and spymaster who developed the idea in the nascent days of israels fight against hamas and terror groups supported by yasir arafats palestinian authority. mr. dagan rightly believed that money was the oxygen that fueled the groups suicide bombing campaign against israel. if israeli security services could suffocate the funds that paid for the bloodshed, the attacks would stop.

in 1996, mr. dagan created a task force code-named harpoon that mobilized government agencies to focus on the money reaching terror cells from state sponsors and international charities. when mr. dagan became head of the mossad, in 2002, harpoon became an operational unit inside israeli intelligence. his spies used the same aggressive action and imaginative chutzpah that had made the mossad a storied force to follow those funds and to go after mr. arafats millions and the charities around the world that funneled cash into hamass coffers.

harpoon targeted the banks that held accounts belonging to palestinian terrorist commanders, and the unit encouraged lawyers  including me  to launch suits in united states federal court seeking monetary damages for victims of state sponsors of terror so that countries like syria, iran and even north korea would realize that the costs of blowing up buses outweighed the political ends the carnage hoped to achieve.

the combined espionage, military and legal offensive helped end the intifada by making it too expensive to continue.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the units greatest success came several years after the intifada, during the second lebanon war, when mr. dagan urged the israeli air force to destroy the banks where hezbollah kept its cash. although hezbollah, the iranian-supported lebanese terrorist group, received hundreds of millions of dollars a year from tehran, it was a global criminal enterprise involved in everything from cocaine trafficking to stealing cars and money laundering. these activities funded its operations against israel and against american forces in iraq.

with the assistance of branches of the united states government, including the department of justice and the treasury department, harpoon went after hezbollahs cocaine business in venezuela and in lebanon, as well as its money-laundering activities in west africa and america. brilliant operations and cons were carried out against hezbollahs captains  operations that ultimately stripped them of the vast fortunes they had assembled over the years. and when the hezbollah hierarchy was cash strapped, harpoon targeted the financial institutions that allowed the terrorists to move their cash across continents, ultimately shutting down the lebanese canadian bank, one of the largest banks in the middle east. it took the syrian civil war, and hezbollahs enormous military involvement on behalf of the assad regime on tehrans tab, to provide the party of god with a financial lifeline. but the fact remains that one of the results of israels financial war against hezbollah has been that israels northern border has remained relatively quiet for more than 11 years.

most military commanders acknowledge that there are very few, if any, feasible solutions to todays standoff with pyongyang. the only effective path is to unleash an offensive press against kims inner circle.

the united states must take the lead by ramping up a covert campaign against the regimes criminal enterprises. this effort ought to include a full-court press of dirty tricks, coercion, heavy-handed threats and even direct action, all covert and deniable, against kims financial wizards who handle the finances, dispense the narcotics and hijack bitcoins.

such tradecraft must also be applied outside north korea and asia against the businesses and banks in europe, south america and elsewhere that enable kims criminal empire to flourish; bankers and businessmen are less likely to have the mettle to resist a late-night visit by men who could ruin their lives. and as north korea is recognized as a state sponsor of terror, helping groups like hezbollah with arms and expertise, a numbing slew of lawsuits should be filed seeking damages; those damages will result in the forfeiture of north korean assets  open and hidden  around the world.

sanctions alone will not work. they have done nothing to stop the missile tests and the saber rattling. only when the money dries up will the loyalty of the men in kims inner circle be compromised and cut away. the north korean dictator will then be under enormous pressure to do whatever he can to alleviate the effects of the spies tapping into his cash and control. with full-scale war on the korean peninsula as the only other alternative, there isnt much of a choice.