its not trivial that a catalan like me should have the honor of being a candidate for prime minister of spain, a fact that contrasts with the francoist and repressive caricature that the separatists try to sell of spain. in fact, the spanish constitution, approved in 1978, was endorsed with 91 percent support in catalonia, and two of the seven founders of the constitution were catalans.

in 1979 spain was a young constitutional monarchy seeking integration with western europe. today it is one of the most important economies of the european union, as well as one of the most decentralized countries with the highest standards of democracy, freedom and social welfare rates in the world.

but in catalonia we are facing a serious social fracture. catalan nationalism has grown notably in recent years, spurred by a decade-long economic crisis and corruption scandals that have generated mistrust in political institutions. the separatist movement parallels populist movements in other western countries in response to globalization and its economic and political challenges: subsidized spain lives at the expense of productive catalonia read an electoral poster from mr. puigdemonts political party; separatists also employ an even blunter slogan, spain robs us.

still, catalan separatists have been very smart. the movement has taken the old exclusionary nationalism, founded on the thesis of a cultural, economic and linguistic difference, and rebranded itself as peace-loving and democratic.

behind this makeover a sense of supremacy defines this movement. it is seen in the use over the past three decades of propaganda in the public media and in the education system, which has been used as a brainwashing machine for the separatist movement started five years ago.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

all this has been exacerbated by both socialist and conservative governments in madrid. to obtain the support of the nationalist parties in the spanish congress of deputies, they gradually ceded privileges and authority to the nationalist governments in catalonia without supervision or coordination.

catalan nationalists have also persistently promoted the idea of a referendum. those of us opposed to the plebiscite believe that not all democratic principles can be put to popular vote. civil rights are not negotiable. millions of catalans cannot be deprived of their spanish and european citizenship while national sovereignty is dissolved, and with it the right of all spaniards to decide together on the future of spain.

on occasion, the federal government of the united states has also had to intervene to safeguard the rights of minority groups who have been trampled underfoot. president john f. kennedy said in 1962, also in a context of disobedience and rights violations by local government, that citizens are free to disagree with the law, but not to disobey it, and that, in a country where the courts and the constitution are challenged, no law would stand free from doubt, no judge would be sure of his writ, and no citizen would be safe from his neighbors.

advertisement continue reading the main story

this is what is happening in catalonia.

separatist leaders would replace the constitution with arbitrariness; judges are being pressured for doing their jobs; the social climate has deteriorated to the point of dividing families and friends. political instability has also led to the exodus of thousands of businesses and a loss of tourism in barcelona, one of the worlds most attractive cities.

fortunately, the constitution allows the national government to hold democratic elections on dec. 21. we catalans will be able to vote in legal regional elections to put an end to this madness. never before has a regional government done so much economic, social and moral damage to catalonia as it has with mr. puigdemont and the deposed vice president oriol junqueras at the helm.

ciudadanos, the party i preside over, began from a catalan civil movement representing a majority of catalans silenced by catalan nationalism. today we are the leading opposition party in catalonia, and a national and european party aspiring to govern spain.

as most spaniards do, a majority of catalans want to participate in a common project for the future of spain. i cannot resign myself to seeing an isolated catalonia in a globalized world, nor can i resign myself to seeing more borders in the era of open societies.

faced with those who promote rupture, i demand dialogue. faced with exclusion, i ask for coexistence; federalism and union, not provincialism and division; the rule of law, not arbitrariness; and pluralism and freedom against dogma and imposition.

i was born in barcelona. catalonia is my homeland, spain is my country, and europe is our future.