cyclones occur in the south pacific and indian ocean; in the atlantic and northeast pacific, such severe storms are called hurricanes.

there was no forewarning, sekhar lukose kuriakose, of the kerala state disaster management authority, said by telephone. there was no scientific means of establishing that this was going to become a cyclone.

but fishermen, saying the government had been slow to notify people of the storm, organized protests on saturday in kerala and in tamil nadu, blocking roads and pooling resources and boats to try to locate the missing.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

speaking to the families of missing fishermen in tamil nadu villages, indias defense minister, nirmala sitharaman, said on sunday that the countrys navy, air force and coast guard were doing everything possible to try to find the missing fishermen.

i speak with folded hands, she told the crowd, in which wives of the missing fishermen wept. we have not stopped searching for them.

several hundred fishermen have been rescued, the kerala disaster management agency said. the state has announced compensation payments of about $15,000 each for the families of those who have died.

mr. kuriakose said that some of the missing fishermen had already been out at sea days before the cyclone formed.

before gathering force, the storm killed at least 13 people last week in neighboring sri lanka, uprooting trees, forcing schools to shut and disrupting air travel.

the india meteorological department said the cyclone was expected to weaken gradually in the next couple of days as it moved north toward the states of maharashtra and gujarat.

advertisement continue reading the main story

heavy rainfall was forecast for the area on tuesday and officials have advised fishermen in southern gujarat and northern maharashtra to stay on shore.