whats in there, meena? i asked.

pictures of my father.

she proudly unwrapped them to show them off. meena and her mother rarely get visits, and never from family members or friends, all of whom are either dead or estranged. part of the reason meena is still behind bars is that she has no surviving relatives who would take her, even if her mother allowed it.

advertisement continue reading the main story

or as ms. gul explained it: i have many enemies. i wouldnt trust anyone to take meena outside.

the photos were of rahmatullah, whom meena calls her father: portraits, snapshots on holiday, pictures of him with ms. gul.

rahmatullah (who like many afghans had only one name) was also convicted of killing ms. guls legal husband, a police colonel, when ms. gul and rahmatullah were having an affair. the colonels body was among those found buried in the yards of the family homes in 2004. rahmatullah was also a convicted pedophile and thief and reputedly a former taliban commander.

what he almost certainly was not, however, was meenas biological father; the dates do not fit. he was already in jail when he implicated ms. gul in the murders, and they were in different prisons in different cities at the time of meenas conception. afghan officials said that an unknown prison officer was meenas birth father, and officials accused ms. gul of deliberately getting pregnant to avoid the gallows.

meena went through the photographs one after another, lingering over some, including two of rahmatullah dead, after his hanging, in a burial shroud but with his face visible; it was not a pretty sight.

in a 2015 interview with the new york times, ms. gul admitted that she and rahmatullah had killed her husband together.

she denied it when i spoke to her. it was all rahmatullahs fault, ms. gul said. i would not be here if it wasnt for him. they should execute me, then meena would have cried for one day, and it would be over. instead i am crying every day; its a slow death, dying all the time.

in her calmer moments, ms. gul had a simple, chilling message to convey: meena deserves her freedom. but she wont get it unless her mother does, too.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story breaking news emails sign up to receive an email from the new york times as soon as important news breaks around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

tell ashraf ghani that! she demanded.

children in jail is a scandal without an easy solution, advocates say. when you didnt commit a crime, you shouldnt be punished for it, and those children did not commit any crimes, said bashir ahmad basharat, the director of the child protection action network, a quasi-governmental agency.

advertisement continue reading the main story

keeping the children in prison is against both international norms and afghan law, mr. basharat said, despite the practice being so widespread. but its something where we dont have other alternatives.

the countrys approximately 30 womens prisons have several hundred children accompanying their mothers, he said. the womens wing at the pul-e-charkhi prison in kabul now has 41 children who are younger than 5.

as afghan prisons go, nangarhars womens facility appeared to be comparatively uncrowded and well maintained. the 36 children there on the day i visited ranged in age from three days to 11 years; meena was the oldest.

the women and their children share 10 relatively large cells, with two double bunk beds each, so many of them sleep on mattresses on the floor. only the compound as a whole was locked up, not the individual cells, so it did not appear prisonlike, aside from the huge steel gates to the outside and the coils of barbed wire atop two rows of surrounding double walls.

meena sat through her mothers tirades impassively, sometimes with a thin, sweet smile. she became more animated talking about her best friend, salma, 10. she said their favorite pastime was playing with their dolls.

dolls? her mother shrieked at an afghan reporter. this stupid person is asking about her dolls? these foreigners are only interested in childish things.

meena said she and salma created their own dolls, named mursal and shakila, out of bits of cloth and string. both of them are girls, she said.

advertisement continue reading the main story

this was too much for ms. gul to bear. what you should do, mr. america, is get her a tv. youre my visitor, you came to talk to me. we dont even have a tv. i should get isis to come and cut off your head.

when it was time to say farewell, meena shook hands with everyone politely, then went to the other end of the courtyard with salma, arm in arm, still carrying her yellow plastic bag.

ms. gul, who had calmed down by then, shook hands politely as well, her gaze bold and challenging. give me some money, she said.