photo

netflix will film the sixth and final season of house of cards with robin wright in the lead role, the company announced on monday.

the season will be eight episodes  significantly shorter than previous seasons, which featured 13 episodes each  and will not include kevin spacey, who led the show to critical acclaim but was fired after a series of sexual assault allegations this fall.

were really excited about bringing some closure to the show for fans, ted sarandos, netflixs chief content officer, said at the ubs global media and communications conference on monday. were excited for the 370 people who make house of cards and have done the best work of their lives on that show; for the 2,000 people in baltimore who have come to depend on that show for their jobs. and so were really excited that we were able to come to a good creative conclusion to the show.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

ms. wrights publicist did not immediately respond to a request for comment on monday.

in late october, the broadway actor anthony rapp told buzzfeed that mr. spacey had tried to sexually assault him in 1986, when mr. rapp was 14; mr. spacey apologized for what he described as deeply inappropriate drunken behavior. that report was followed by a slew of other allegations of sexual misconduct, including from more than 20 people at the old vic theater in london, where mr. spacey was artistic director from 2004 to 2015. the accusations involve episodes as recent as 2016, when he is alleged to have sexually assaulted an 18-year-old at a bar on nantucket, mass.

advertisement continue reading the main story

media rights capital, the studio behind house of cards, suspended mr. spacey shortly after mr. rapp came forward, and netflix said it would not be involved with any further production involving mr. spacey. the sixth season will be the shows last  a decision netflix announced after the allegations came out but said had been made months earlier.