that has a chilling effect on developing countries, she said. but its ridiculous  the u.s. also has an obesity epidemic, but no one is proposing that we withhold food aid from south sudan.

uganda has implemented an innovative solution. here, liquid morphine is produced by a private charity overseen by the government. and with doctors in short supply, the law lets even nurses prescribe morphine after specialized training.

about 11 percent of ugandans needing morphine get it. inadequate as that is, it makes uganda a standout not just in africa, but in the world.

yet there is very little opioid abuse here; alcohol, marijuana and khat are far bigger problems.

no relief in sight

a recent major study by the lancet commission on global access to palliative care and pain relief described a broad and deep abyss in access to painkillers between rich countries and poor ones.

the united states, the report said, produces or imports 31 times as much narcotic pain-relievers it needs whether in legal or illegal form: morphine, hydrocodone, heroin, methadone, fentanyl and so on.

haiti, by contrast, gets slightly less than 1 percent of what it needs. and nigeria, on a per-capita basis, gets only a quarter of what haiti gets: 0.2 percent of its need.

advertisement continue reading the main story

even in big countries with domestic pharmaceutical industries, citizens still get shortchanged on pain relief, the report said. india and indonesia, the second- and fourth-most populous countries on the planet, each supply only 4 percent of their own needs. russia is at 8 percent. china, at 16 percent, barely beats uganda.

each country has its own barriers, said dr. james f. cleary, director of pain and policy studies at the university of wisconsins medical school and a member of the commission that produced the lancet study.

in some countries, doctors get no palliative care training; in others, legislators or the police oppose importing narcotics or deliberately make prescribing them difficult because of what the report deems opiophobia.

pharmaceutical companies are uninterested in selling the generic morphine needed by poor countries because it is cheap and yields little profit.

enough morphine to treat the entire world for end-of-life suffering would cost only $145 million a year, the lancet report found.