at 11, she was orphaned during the great depression after her family fell ill with typhoid fever. a younger sister also died, and ms. finlay and ms. montgomery, the only survivors, were separated and raised by aunts in their hometown, pittsburg, tex.

after high school, ms. finlay moved to st. louis and in 1941 began a correspondence with her future husband, augustine finlay, who was in the navy. they stayed in touch through letters during world war ii while mr. finlay, of the bronx, was deployed at guantnamo bay, a naval base in cuba then used for postal operations and anti-submarine warfare training.

they met in person when she came to new york in 1947, and they married two years later, settling in brooklyn. a newly divorced ms. montgomery followed her sister to new york in 1952, bringing along her daughter.

ms. finlay worked at a manufacturing company for two decades, a job that outlasted her marriage. (the couple divorced in 1961.) she took a job as a companion to the elderly for a couple of years, but when a friend asked if she wanted to run the restaurant, the opportunity piqued her interest.

photo

the sisters, then in their 50s, bought the luncheonette and ran it for the better part of a decade. ms. finlay said they closed after crime rose in the neighborhood and we were afraid to be in the business alone.

the space is now dean street cafe, a kosher coffee shop that roasts beans in house and serves $3 espresso shots and artisanal sandwiches starting at $6. the owner, zalmy mochkin, opened the shop in january.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the diner in the 1950s, 60s and 70s was the backbone of americas food culture. im trying to bring back the history of the place, mr. mochkin, 27, said. we want to contribute to whats here.

after the restaurant closed, ms. finlay embarked on three decades of volunteering. testaments to her service line the walls of her apartment in the flatbush neighborhood of brooklyn, where ms. finlay has lived for 35 years. she volunteered with the salem missionary baptist church in flatbush, and with the lions club international. she received the radiant star of paradise award from the order of the eastern star, which the group called a token of our love and appreciation for her dedicated excellence in service, in 2004; a distinguished service award from the 42nd assembly district community democratic club in 2006; and a certificate of merit from the new york state assembly for community service in 2007.

the awards taper off after that. in spring 2009, she fell while walking on her street, breaking a finger. she then contacted jasa, a beneficiary agency of uja-federation of new york, one of the eight organizations supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, to request housekeeping services.

photo

ms. finlay, who lives on $1,193 in social security benefits and $149 in food stamps each month, also has glaucoma, edema and borderline diabetes. she is now receiving 20 hours of home-care services and seven prepared meals each week from jasa. in may, jasa put $75 from the neediest cases fund toward her electric and gas bills.

after hearing ms. finlays story, mr. mochkin said he would like to raise money through the cafe for his predecessor. this is about love and connecting people, he said.

ms. finlay relishes old photographs. framed memories of her family crowd the tops of furniture around her home, and albums are stacked on shelves. when her home health aide, jennifer king, was unable to locate a particular portrait of ms. montgomery, ms. finlay pulled herself up and navigated the room in jolted steps, her legs bent from muscle weakness. she dipped deeply, steadying herself on a nearby table, then pointed to a lower shelf with her cane.

the desired album in hand, she returned to her seat. she combed through it, skimming the photographs, a slight smile on her face. there was a trip to california in 1955 with her ex-husband. there were family reunions back in texas. there was her sisters daughter, with whom she speaks several times a week by phone.

one frayed, sepia-toned photograph depicts ms. montgomery, who died in 2014 after a mild stroke at the age of 92. the photo shows a much younger woman wearing high heels and a plaid skirt, her feet crossed and her hands folded in her lap. she smiles with her lips closed, one cheek dimpled, feathers pluming from a crown braid.

shes lost in reminiscing, ms. king said.