the second klan was national in scope, with a surprisingly small footprint in the south  its highest per-capita state memberships were in indiana and oregon. in new jersey, klansmen burned a cross in the black section of metuchen, today a liberal commuter suburb of new york. the klan was so powerful in southern california that it nicknamed anaheim klanaheim. its main focus was, as always, on spreading hatred against blacks, jews and catholics, but its agenda always fit the local context: in the southwest, it turned its ire on hispanics and latino immigrants; in the pacific northwest, it took aim at japanese.

like the alt-right today, the klan was never a political party, but it wielded sizable influence in politics. klan members or klan-endorsed politicians held the governors office in oregon, texas and colorado; it controlled mayors offices from portland, me., to portland, ore. and lest we criticize the current president for being uniquely unable to condemn the alt-right, bear in mind that no president in the post-world war i era from woodrow wilson to herbert hoover would condemn the klan either, for fear of losing public support.

but the klans real power lay not in politics but in its reach into the everyday. gordon paints a picture like something out of a vonnegut novel, an america seen in a fun-house mirror: the klan sponsored baseball teams (one played the hebrew all-stars in a 1927 game in washington, d.c.), county fairs (she includes a striking photo of klansmen in full hooded regalia riding on a ferris wheel in colorado), college fraternities and beauty pageants, in which young women competed for the title of miss 100 percent america.

advertisement continue reading the main story

a historian at new york university, gordon has written books on a broad range of topics, from 16th-century ukraine to birth control, and she is one of only a few historians to twice win the bancroft prize, the professions highest honor. but in this book, she rejects the academics commitment to history for historys sake in favor of a perspective on the past that explicitly comments on the present. in my discussion of the ku klux klan i am not neutral, she writes, adding later in the same paragraph, i am offering an interpretation, not a scholarly monograph.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

gordon wants readers to consider the second klan in light of recent american politics, but its important to parse what that era does and doesnt say about our current situation. todays alt-right  and i use this term broadly, ranging from richard spencer and those even further to his right, to mainstream politicians, like the senate candidate roy moore of alabama and representative steve king of iowa, who espouse a slightly laundered version of spencers nationalist, traditionalist xenophobia  is nowhere near as broad or pervasive as the klan was then.

nor is the alt-right as well organized. readers jaws will drop at how expansive and structured the klan was, from its code words to its machine-like control over city councils and state legislatures. in many small towns, belonging to the klan was a means of career advancement for political strivers  among them hugo black and, apparently, harry truman. its hard to imagine anyone, anywhere, saying the same of the alt-right today.

but underneath those differences are similarities that point to a recurrent tendency in american history. its hard to finish a single page in gordons book without a slight tingle of fearful familiarity, of reverberations in rhetoric and public opinion  a recognition that, maybe, it has always been thus. precisely because the second klan was so mainstream, she writes, examining it also reveals continuing currents in american history, currents at times rising to the surface, at other times remaining subterranean.

like todays alt-right, the second klan envisioned an american past cut from mythical cloth: an america without immigrants, an america ruled by anglo-saxon whites, an america that prayed in unison to an evangelical-christian god. the klan rejected scientific claims that challenged its worldview. it railed against the cosmopolitan, liberal elite, but it tried to make common cause with moneyed interests. it played on white peoples sense of fear, humiliation and victimization. and it spread misinformation about its enemies, planting false news stories about conspiratorial jews and greedy catholic priests. these echoes are not coincidental.

the second klan fell as fast as it rose; with several million members at its height in the mid-1920s, it had collapsed later in the decade to 350,000, brought low by internal corruption scandals. something similar could, perhaps, happen today. should a scandal turn steve bannon and breitbart toxic, is there any doubt that their movement would suffer a body blow?

there are two ways to think about this. one could say, great  weve met the enemy before, and defeated him. well do it again. or we could realize that weve met the enemy, and he is us. that the plague of xenophobia, racism and nationalism is always present, that it can lie dormant for years and years in furniture and linen-chests, as camus wrote, ready to re-emerge, given the right conditions.

they say the job of an anthropologist is to make the familiar strange and the strange familiar, and something similar goes for the historian. i can think of few books that accomplish this task as well as gordons: in her telling, the second klan is at once utterly bizarre and undeniably american. the 2010s may not be the 1920s, but for anyone concerned with our present condition, the second coming of the kkk should be required reading.