president trump is currently indulging in some revisionist history, reportedly telling allies, including at least one united states senator, that the voice on the tape is not his. this has hit a raw nerve in me.

i can only imagine how it has reopened the wounds of the women who came forward with their stories about him, and did not receive enough attention. this country is currently trying to reconcile itself to years of power abuse and sexual misconduct. its leader is wantonly poking the bear.

in 2005, i was in my first full year as a co-anchor of the show access hollywood on nbc. mr. trump, then on the apprentice, was the networks biggest star.

the key to succeeding in my line of work was establishing a strong rapport with celebrities. i did that, and was rewarded for it. my segments with donald trump when i was just a correspondent were part of the reason i got promoted.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

nbc tripled my salary and paid for my moving van from new york to los angeles.

was i acting out of self-interest? you bet i was. was i alone? far from it. with mr. trumps outsized viewership back in 2005, everybody from billy bush on up to the top brass on the 52nd floor had to stroke the ego of the big cash cow along the way to higher earnings.

none of us were guilty of knowingly enabling our future president. but all of us were guilty of sacrificing a bit of ourselves in the name of success.

ten years later, i did speak up. soon after mr. trump declared his candidacy, i let it be known on access hollywood live that i thought this was an absurd idea.

advertisement continue reading the main story

in the days, weeks and months to follow, i was highly critical of the idea of a trump presidency. the man who once told me  ironically, in another off-camera conversation  after i called him out for inflating his ratings: people will just believe you. you just tell them and they believe you, was, i thought, not a good choice to lead our country.

i tried to conduct a serious interview with him as a candidate; each time i requested one i was turned down.

this moment in american life is no doubt painful for many women. it is especially painful for the women who have come forward, at the risk of forever being linked to one event, this man, this president of the united states. (i still cant believe i just wrote that.)

to these women: i will never know the fear you felt or the frustration of being summarily dismissed and called a liar, but i do know a lot about the anguish of being inexorably linked to donald trump. you have my respect and admiration. you are culture warriors at the forefront of necessary change.

i have faith that when the hard work of exposing these injustices is over, the current media drama of who did what to whom will give way to a constructive dialogue between mature men and women in the workplace and beyond. the activist and gender-relations expert jackson katz has said that this is not a womens issue  its a mens issue. thats a great place to start, and something i have real thoughts about  but it is a story for another day.

today is about reckoning and reawakening, and i hope it reaches all the guys on the bus.

on a personal note, this last year has been an odyssey, the likes of which i hope to never face again: anger, anxiety, betrayal, humiliation, many selfish but, i hope, understandable emotions. but these have given way to light, both spiritual and intellectual. its been fortifying.

i know that i dont need the accouterments of fame to know god and be happy. after everything over the last year, i think im a better man and father to my three teenage daughters  far from perfect, but better.