every november, mothers, fathers and siblings link arms and tap dance straight into the holiday season. gathered around the glow of a fireplace or at a packed table for turkey dinner, generations bound by blood, marriage  or even a good sondheim song  impart wisdom and gifts to their offspring. and every new smile, no matter how different, is greeted with kindness and acceptance.

hardly.

in a #notfilter world of instagram-less gatherings, the traditional family is far more complex. thanksgiving tables are part battlefield, part stage. and a quick look around will reveal not only who is present but who is not. and in the case of the photographers in (un)expected families, opening dec. 9 at the museum of fine arts in boston, the parentheses hold a lot of weight.

in a number of instances, the person missing from the picture is the photographer, said karen haas, the museums photography curator. and while the exhibition  which includes photos by latoya ruby frazier, harry callahan, nan goldin and duane michals  highlights socio-economic polarities, affluent and destitute, cohesive and fractured, expected and unexpected, the spectrum of gazes, absences and appearances made by the photographers among families  their own or others  feels even stronger.

take tina barneys thanksgiving, 1992, (slide 3) an image of the transplanted new yorker with her neighbors in rhode island. the camera flash above the neighbors daughter (wearing red) reflected in the glass door reveals ms. barney, although she attributes this to an accident. but it also implies her absence from her own familys holiday meal, whether that was the case or not. ms. barney, who has spent a lot of her career photographing theatrical tableaus of affluent, if cold, new york society, said she found relief in the rituals of her adopted rhode island community.

photo

there is a warm family feeling in that town, and its why i love it, she said, adding that she might be the only person, as a native new yorker, to lock the door in her area. there is a feeling of intimacy and warmth i did not grow up with.

in sage sohiers mum in her bathtub, washington, d.c., the photographer is clearly visible in a mirror behind her mother. and in julie macks self-portrait with family in suv, michigan ms. macks choice of equipment and angle bend the cars glass into what looks like a bubble, implying, well, that her family is perhaps isolated in one.

and then theres louie palus black and white portraits of marines. these are some of the few single-person portraits among images of families or groups. paired with a group photo, there is an initial sense of loneliness. but isolate the image and its a different story.

in the military, you arrive alone and leave the military alone but live on a battlefield as part of a close group of people who will do everything to support you and are willing to risk their life to save yours, he said. when you are a soldier, your comrades can define a life-changing experience not a single member of your biological family will ever understand. when you come home, your mother, father, wife, brothers, sisters and children can never connect to that experience like your comrades can. when you are in a group, you are strong, and when you are alone, you are not.

photo

nicholas nixon has two photos in the show, one of literal absence  a mother holding an image of her recently-deceased daughter; and the other of extreme presence  his famous yazoo city, mississippi. here, a young girl, who he thought was about 13, stands up tall under her uncles arm. he is now working on a series of photos in which he appears as the subject alongside his wife, bebe. and though known as the photographer who shot a single image of the brown sisters every year for 40 years, he says by putting himself in his images, he shows his own closeness to her.

we merge, he said. were like this old, happy pair of walruses living together, happy.

correction: nov. 20, 2017:

an earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to the location of tina barneys neighbors. they were in rhode island, not idaho.

follow @nytimesphoto on twitter. you can also find lens on facebook and instagram.