now lets see if those descriptions apply to president trump.

on saturday morning, in the wake of the bombshell guilty plea by michael flynn, the presidents former national security adviser, for lying to f.b.i. agents about his communications with russian officials late last year, mr. trump tweeted, i had to fire general flynn because he lied to the vice president and the fbi.

recall that the original justification for mr. flynns firing was simply that he had misled vice president mike pence; otherwise he had done nothing wrong. thats the case mr. trump made the day after mr. flynns firing, when he allegedly tried to shut down the f.b.i.s inquiry into his campaigns connections with russian officials by telling james comey, who was then the f.b.i. director, in a private oval office meeting, i hope you can see your way clear to letting this go, to letting flynn go.

in may, mr. trump fired mr. comey, telling russian officials in the oval office the next day that firing mr. comey had relieved great pressure on him, and referring to mr. comey as a nut job. in an interview with nbc, mr. trump said, when i decided to just do it, i said to myself, i said, you know, this russia thing with trump and russia is a made-up story.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

it was bad enough for the president to attempt to interfere in any way with a law enforcement investigation of one of his top aides. but with saturdays tweet, mr. trump admitted that he knew mr. flynn had committed a federal crime at the time he fired mr. comey for refusing to stop investigating him. to most people with a functioning prefrontal cortex, it sure sounds like mr. trump is admitting to interfering or endeavoring to interfere with the conduct of investigations and to impeding the administration of justice.

mr. dowd confused the country further by saying he had drafted mr. trumps tweet himself  a bizarre claim for a lawyer to make about a statement that incriminates his client. then he outdid himself with his assertion to axios that it is not possible for the president to obstruct justice. the argument, as far as it goes, is that the president is the nations highest ranking law enforcement officer and has the constitutional authority to supervise and control the executive branch, which includes making decisions about investigations and personnel.

but mr. trump didnt just try to shut down some random no-name case; he tried to shut down an investigation into his own campaigns ties to the russian governments efforts to swing the 2016 election in his favor. as that investigation keeps revealing, mr. trumps top associates have repeatedly been untruthful about their contacts and communications with russian officials.

in saturdays tweet, mr. trump also wrote, it is a shame because his actions during the transition were lawful. there was nothing to hide! if there were truly nothing to hide, if these talks with russians were all just part of a normal presidential transition process, then why all the lying?

any child could tell you the answer: people lie when they know theyve done something wrong. mr. flynn and others in mr. trumps campaign and transition team were secretly trying to undermine united states foreign policy as private citizens  which is not just wrong, but a criminal violation of the logan act. worse, the policy being undermined was president barack obamas punishment of a foreign adversary for interfering in an american election, and the underminers  mr. trumps team  were the very people who benefited most directly from that interference.

for some historical perspective, richard nixon once again proves useful. in the closing days of the 1968 presidential campaign, mr. nixon ordered h. r. haldeman, later his chief of staff, to throw a monkey wrench into the vietnamese peace talks, knowing that a serious move to end the war would hurt his electoral prospects. mr. nixon denied that he did this to the grave; mr. haldemans notes, discovered after his death, revealed the truth.

advertisement continue reading the main story

meanwhile, as the evidence of both subterfuge and obstruction continues to grow, mr. trumps tireless spinners and sophists are working to convince the american public that its all no big deal. this is an embarrassing and unpersuasive argument, but its not surprising. at this point, they have nothing else to work with.