photo

wonder wheel, woody allens latest movie, is one of his more unfortunate contributions to cinema. it tells the story of a desperately, unhappily married woman whose affair with a local romeo is derailed when he takes notice of her stepdaughter, whose breasts have been lit to glow like vermeer peaches. the heart wants what it wants, as mr. allen once said by way of explaining his affair with his now wife, soon-yi, the daughter of his longtime ex, mia farrow. i tend to think its a bad idea to put a movie on the couch, but what if it climbs on the couch and then starts winking?

wonder wheel returns mr. allen to coney island, the childhood home of his alter ego alvy singer, the narrator of annie hall who claims to have grown up under the amusement parks roller coaster. (i have some trouble between fantasy and reality, alvy says.) in wonder wheel, the sad wife, ginny (kate winslet), lives in an apartment that looks directly onto the parks looming ferris wheel. the attraction obscures her view of the ocean, literalizing already narrow horizons, and casts deep, expressionistic blue and red light on the apartments dilapidated interior and its equally worn inhabitants.

ginny isnt all used up, despite the insistently unflattering way she is often presented. she winces and frowns a lot, and the camera conspires with the lighting and makeup to catch every twitch of distress, and the sweaty, oily sheen she never seems able to blot away. its no surprise that shes worried. she works in a clam house on the boardwalk, scrambling for hoi polloi, while back at home she has to juggle her loud, loutish husband, humpty (jim belushi), and her son, richie (jack gore). like the young alvy in annie hall, richie is a redhead. but while alvy is depressed about the universe, richie seems largely troubled by his home life, specifically his demonstrably miserable mother.

video

so, when mickey (justin timberlake, too modern a presence), a lifeguard and self-described romantic, gives ginny the once over, she gratefully falls into his arms. wonder wheel more or less becomes ginnys story, but she doesnt get to own it. the movie is narrated by mickey, who pops in and out and looks directly into the camera. he has literary ambitions, as he likes to remind us, as well as a pad in greenwich village. for a while, mickey offers ginny a respite from her everyday grind, at least until the arrival of carolina (a fine juno temple), humptys daughter from an earlier marriage. shes on the run from her gangster husband. i know where all the bodies are buried, carolina says.

advertisement continue reading the main story

somewhat of a cultural magpie, mr. allen has often folded bits and pieces  and at times entire conceits  from other work into his movies. mickey mentions eugene oneill, a reference that suggests were meant to see something of that playwright in ginny and humpty at their most raw and boozily fraught. mr. allens often blunt, overwrought dialogue, however, also alternately brings to mind budd schulberg (i coulda been a contender) and imitation clifford odets. in some scenes, you almost expect mr. belushi, whos playing his heart out, to start bellowing about someone named lefty. much like its gaudy title attraction, wonder wheel keeps on turning, even while going nowhere.