mr. cuomo has said repeatedly that forcing new york residents to pay federal taxes on income on which they already paid state taxes amounts to double taxation. and while the two governors and the governor-elect stopped short of saying they would sue, each seemed to agree that lawsuits might be in the offing.

im not a lawyer, but im betting there are some holes and flaws in this bill, mr. murphy said.

mr. cuomo, who purportedly has national ambitions, called the bill political retaliation through the tax code, noting that states like new york and california were democratic strongholds. he also suggested that if an onerous tax plan is signed by president trump, the response from his party and their supporters should be immediate.

if they do this, the next day were going to start the repeal and replace movement for the tax act, he said, likening such a strategy to republicans continuing  and unsuccessful  efforts to end the affordable care act.

e. j. mcmahon, the founder of the empire center for public policy, a fiscally conservative watchdog group, said that the governors rhetoric about the tax bill had often been overly blunt  theres been zero nuance, he said  but that mr. cuomo was correct in that the g.o.p. plan had a political edge to it.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

its basically a net tax shift to the higher-tax states, mr. mcmahon said. theyre going to where the money is, and that, he added, was the repeal of the state and local tax deduction.

mayor bill de blasio, who also is a democrat, cautioned that the tax cut could still hit a snag if republican members of congress come under pressure from constituents and local officials in high tax areas. he suggested that there were numerous republican mayors and republican local officials who think this is horrible and are telling their republican congress member not to do it.

so our job is to stop it, he continued. if we cant stop it, the impact is going to be very negative on the taxpayers of the city.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the mayor said that about 700,000 new york city residents would pay more taxes essentially immediately, and those are overwhelmingly working-class and middle-class people.

the states congressional delegation was also mulling the impact. representative adriano espaillat, a democrat who represents a swath of upper manhattan and the bronx, said he had heard from a variety of concerned constituents, many of whom pay far more than $10,000 in property taxes. he said he also feared the double whammy of higher tax bills and services cut by a state already facing a multibillion-dollar deficit.

the congressman also said that voters might revolt once they start visiting their accountants. when it hits your pockets, its telling, its real, he said.

on monday, mr. cuomo acknowledged that it had sometimes been hard to get his dire message across  the problem nowadays is there is so much news and so much happening, he said  but also said that republican politicians in the state should be wary of voters response should the tax plan go through.

they have an election next year and ultimately democracy works, he said. and a congressperson who votes for this? theres no going home again.