retaining the alternative minimum tax in reform is even more harmful than it is in its present form  among other things, it eviscerates the impact of certain progrowth policies like the r.&d. tax credit and exacerbates the international antiabuse rules, caroline l. harris, the chief tax counsel at the united states chamber of commerce, said in a statement. this cannot be the intended impact from a congress who has worked for years to enact a more globally competitive tax code.

the national association of manufacturers also voiced concerns about the tax, warning that republicans were jeopardizing research and development, which they said fueled innovation and development among manufacturers.

manufacturers are working with key policymakers to ensure the final bill does not inadvertently harm manufacturing, said chris netram, the vice president for tax and domestic economic policy at the manufacturers lobbying group.

a top house republican agreed on monday that the senates handling of the tax was problematic.

i think that has to be eliminated, because that would destroy r.&d., representative kevin mccarthy, republican of california and the majority leader, said on cnbc.

mr. mccarthy expressed optimism that the house and senate would be able to bridge other gaps between the bills. house members voted monday evening to form a conference committee that will work to resolve differences with the aim of getting final legislation to president trump by christmas.

the house and senate plans differ on both the number of individual tax brackets and the rates, as well as how they tax so-called pass-through businesses. they also have different international tax provisions and vary in how they treat the estate tax. the house bill fully repeals the so-called death tax, while the senate bill raises the income threshold that determines who pays it.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the sensitivity surrounding the estate tax was on display over the weekend when senator chuck e. grassley, republican of iowa, made the case for scrapping it to the des moines register. i think not having the estate tax recognizes the people that are investing, as opposed to those that are just spending every darn penny they have, whether its on booze or women or movies, mr. grassley said.

on monday, mr. grassley said his comments were taken out of context, explaining that he was trying to say that government shouldnt seize the fruits of someones lifetime of labor after they die.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the senate is also expected this week to name its members to the conference committee. a person familiar with the process said that representative kevin brady, republican of texas and the chairman of the house ways and means committee, is expected to lead the conference committee.

the committee, which will be made up of republicans and democrats, will hold one public meeting. the real negotiating, however, will happen behind closed doors, and democrats have said they expect to be shut out of this part of the process. both the house and senate tax bills passed along party lines, with no democratic support.

further adjustments to the bills could create new problems, including the need to find more revenue to ensure the package stays in the $1.5 trillion box that lawmakers have allowed for the legislation. mr. trump appeared to suggest on saturday that he was open to raising the corporate tax rate slightly higher than 20 percent, perhaps to 22 percent, which could bring in some additional money. however, a senior administration official said on monday that mr. trump wanted it to remain at 20 percent and that he was merely recounting what he was told about the process of combining the two bills.

while republican lawmakers work to get their tax bill across the finish line, they will also have to focus on keeping the government open for business.

government funding is set to expire at the end of friday, and republicans plan to pass a two-week stopgap spending measure to provide more time for negotiations. mr. trump is expected on thursday to meet with congressional leaders from both parties. an earlier meeting was roiled after mr. trump posted on twitter that he would not cut a deal with democrats, whose leaders promptly pulled out of the meeting.

congressional leaders are now in talks over raising caps on spending that were imposed in 2011. once a deal is reached, lawmakers can work out the details of a long-term spending package.

the stopgap spending measure would keep the government funded through dec. 22. but such a short-term fix would only delay, rather than eliminate, the threat of a shutdown before the end of the year.

this bill, one without any controversial policy riders, will continue government funding and give the house and senate time to complete their work on a long-term solution, senator mitch mcconnell, republican of kentucky and the majority leader, said on monday.