so on this brisk november day, my hands-free road trip with super cruise offered a glimpse into that future  a world in which the grinding daily commute will transform into quiet time, and long drives can become productive hours on the road.

super cruise was introduced in september and is general motors answer to teslas autopilot, the best known of the semiautonomous driving systems that have arrived in the past two years. neither autopilot nor super cruise is fully autonomous  both require drivers to remain alert and prepared to take control at any time.

but super cruise has one big advantage: unlike autopilot, it does not require you to keep your hands on the steering wheel. as im typing this, a camera mounted on the steering column is monitoring my eyes and head. as long as i glance up every so often, super cruise knows that im keeping an eye on the road.

for more than an hour, super cruise pilots the car with no input from me  no steering, no braking and no acceleration. in that time, i cover 65 miles. with my hands free, i scroll through twitter and facebook. i log into my bank account and read the headlines from the new york times.

as long as i look up at the road about every three seconds, super cruise remains in command, maintaining a safe following distance and easing the cadillac through the freeways contours. when super cruise is engaged, a thin light strip on the top of the steering wheel appears green. if i look away longer than three seconds, it flashes to bring my gaze back on the highway. if i fail to do so, the light strip turns red and the drivers seat vibrates, telling me to take control.

that has happened only once so far. to get super cruise back, i need only look forward and place my hands on the wheel. after a few seconds, the light strip turns green again, and my hands are free to go back to the iphone.

i quickly learn how to glance regularly at the road. my host in south bend, my cousin pat, calls me using the video chat function in facebook messenger. i hold the phone up over the steering wheel so that i can see pat on the screen while keeping my gaze looking forward, ensuring super cruise remains in control.

photo

all the while, the ct6 stays centered in the left lane of i-94. but if i want to change lanes or to pass other cars, i take the wheel myself and steer the car over. the light strip turns blue, indicating im temporarily overriding super cruise. once the car is in the new lane, the strip goes back to green and im hands-free again. it decelerates when approaching slower vehicles. when the road clears, it accelerates back up to the speed ive selected: 74 m.p.h., four over the speed limit.

advertisement continue reading the main story

at one point, a car merging onto the highway scoots in front of me. super cruise responds quickly and brakes. i sense no danger of a collision.

g.m. is careful to specify that it is not promoting super cruise as a way to let drivers text, google or open a newspaper on the highway. we dont recommend it, said lisa sieradski, global product manager for the ct6. it will allow you to glance down at a phone or the radio, but you have to return your eyes to the road.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

nonetheless, using the same video-chatting method, i watch a four-minute highlight video from a rangers game. (they beat the bruins, 4-2.) i also conduct a phone interview, taking notes with a pen and a pad. when my trip ended, i had covered 378 miles. my hands were on the wheel for no more than 25 of them.

ms. sieradski said g.m. had tried to engineer super cruise to keep drivers safe  and limit opportunities to use the system improperly  by restricting how and where they could use it. the system will not operate at speeds above 85 mile per hour, for example.

and super cruise can be activated only on divided, limited-access highways such as interstates  places where it need not contend with intersections, traffic lights and pedestrians. the system determines its exact location by relying on high-precision digital maps and gps technology, while sensors track the surrounding traffic  the way sensors do for driver aides like adaptive cruise control. the system is able to determine when the car is on a service road along the highway, or even on entry and exit ramps  locations where it requires you to steer yourself.

but when the super cruise system senses it is on an approved road, a white steering wheel icon appears on the instrument panel. press a button, and the green bar lights up and the system takes over.

for now, super cruise is available only on the 2018 ct6. dealers in michigan are offering the car with the option for about $73,000.

the ability to cruise on the highway hands-free is a major step forward. for many drivers, systems that require them to keep their hands on the steering wheel seem almost self-defeating. whats the point of having the car steer itself if your hands have to stay on the wheel?

advertisement continue reading the main story

while driving the ct6 over several days, i found it was actually more pleasing to leave my phone alone. one morning at rush hour, i sat quietly with my hands on my knees, sipping a latte as though i were relaxing on my couch.

on the return leg of my south bend trip, i turned on the back massager built into the ct6s drivers seat. from my phone, i piped a new-age meditation through the ct6s sound system.

as i stared at the truck ahead of me, and the seat kneaded my lower back, i crossed the border into the state of zen. the voice on the meditation intoned: you are feeling relaxed and calm.

for two hours and 120 miles, i was.