the supreme courts orders effectively overturned a compromise in place since june, when the court said travelers with connections to the united states could continue to travel here notwithstanding restrictions in an earlier version of the ban.

the orders gave no reasons for the courts shift. the move did suggest that the administrations chances of prevailing at the supreme court when the justices consider the lawfulness of the latest ban have markedly increased.

video

attorney general jeff sessions called the order a substantial victory for the safety and security of the american people. a spokesman for the white house, hogan gidley, said, we are not surprised by todays supreme court decision, calling it lawful and essential to protecting our homeland.

the american civil liberties union, which represents people and groups challenging the ban, said it would continue to argue against the ban as challenges against it in lower appeals courts proceed.

president trumps anti-muslim prejudice is no secret  he has repeatedly confirmed it, including just last week on twitter, said omar jadwat, director of the a.c.l.u.s immigrants rights project. its unfortunate that the full ban can move forward for now, but this order does not address the merits of our claims.

in a pair of filings in the supreme court, solicitor general noel j. francisco said mr. trump had acted under his broad constitutional and statutory authority to control immigration when he issued a new proclamation in september announcing the new travel restrictions.

mr. francisco wrote that the process leading to the proclamation was more deliberate than those that had led to earlier bans, issued in january and march. those orders were temporary measures, he wrote, while the proclamation was the product of extensive study and deliberation.

advertisement continue reading the main story

lawyers with the a.c.l.u. told the justices that little had changed. the proclamation is the third order the president has signed this year banning more than 100 million individuals from muslim-majority nations from coming to the united states, they wrote.

in october, federal judges in maryland and hawaii blocked major parts of the latest ban while legal challenges proceed.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

a nationality-based travel ban against eight nations consisting of over 150 million people is unprecedented, wrote judge theodore d. chuang of the federal district court in maryland. citing statements from mr. trump, some made as a presidential candidate and some more recent, judge chuang found that the new proclamation was tainted by religious animus and most likely violated the constitutions prohibition of government establishment of religion.

similarly, judge derrick k. watson of the federal district court in honolulu found that the september proclamation suffers from precisely the same maladies as its predecessor, adding that it plainly discriminates based on nationality in violation of federal law and the founding principles of this nation.

the administration has appealed both decisions to federal appeals courts in seattle and richmond, va. arguments in those appeals are scheduled for this week.

judge chuang limited his injunction to exclude people without a credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the united states, quoting from a supreme court order issued in june concerning the second travel ban. judge watson did not impose such a limitation, but an appeals court modified his injunction, also quoting the supreme courts language.

lawyers for hawaii, which is challenging the ban, told the justices that there was no reason to make changes now.

less than six months ago, this court considered and rejected a stay request indistinguishable from the one the government now presses, they wrote. but the justification for that dramatic relief has only weakened. in place of a temporary ban on entry, the president has imposed an indefinite one, deepening and prolonging the harms a stay would inflict.

mr. francisco asked the justices to allow every part of the third ban to go into effect. the second version of the travel ban, he wrote, involved temporary procedures before the review was conducted and in the absence of a presidential determination concerning the adequacy of foreign governments information-sharing and identity-management practices.

advertisement continue reading the main story

now that the review has been completed and identified ongoing deficiencies in the information needed to assess nationals of particular countries, he wrote, additional restrictions are needed.