tourism and haiti may not seem like they go together, but in the years after world war ii, the country belonged to the caribbean highlight reel. a 1947 new york times article with the headline the pleasures of haiti described it as fiercely independent, riotously colorful, and surprisingly inexpensive and recommended hotels, bars and places to visit. i found similar articles from the 1930s through the end of the 1950s, all extolling haitis exceptional culture and many attractions. cruise ships and planes unloaded tourists in port-au-prince, where they would stroll through downtown and buy souvenirs in this shoppers paradise, according to an article from 1956.

it has been several generations since haiti was a major tourist destination, but it may become one again. international hotel chains have arrived, and the number of flights to the country has increased substantially. for years, american airlines was the only u.s. carrier flying in or out but now jetblue, spirit and delta also serve port-au-prince, and american has begun a daily flight to cap haitien.

when i arrived this fall, my friend pierre esperance picked me up at the port-au-prince airport. ive known pierre since 2000, a year after he was attacked and almost assassinated due to his occupation as haitis most prominent human rights activist. despite the attack and other threats, hes still in the same line of work.

pierre is optimistic, even ebullient, yet also a cleareyed observer of haitis dysfunction. that evening, when i asked him to assess the countrys current situation, his amiable disposition shifted to neutral. haiti was in an uncertain place, he said, facing a mix of progress and setbacks. road infrastructure had improved, as had the police, but haitis institutions were much too weak and the political will to support them did not exist. the justice and prison sectors were particularly problematic.

we chatted on his terrace, filled with pink, white, red, and orange bougainvillea, and waited for the electricity to come on. pierres house gets power only a few hours every day, and he is one of the lucky ones. it is a stark reminder that in some ways haiti has progressed very little. pierre was born on nearby gonve island, and grew up without any electricity during the dictatorship of jean-claude duvalier.

advertisement continue reading the main story

near the end of our evening together, i asked pierre to compare that dictatorship to the current moment. he laughed and looked surprised. its night and day, he said. because today we have liberty of expression. under duvaliers regime, you could not come here to sit and talk, because thered be people listening to us and theyd come to arrest us. but today you can walk down the street and speak however you want.

i toured port-au-prince the next day. it was a national holiday, and traffic was light. i visited a few of the capitals interesting sights: the bustling, rebuilt iron market, the port-au-prince cemetery, a warren of snaking pathways around built-up tombs, and the metalworks area in neighboring croix des bouquets, where for generations haitians have transformed the tops of oil drums and other pieces of metal into ornate masterpieces.