on the heels of the revolution, a palpable social transformation had begun and continued to advance despite the severe crackdown on political freedoms. many muslims, ordinary men and women, started to grapple with the perversion of their religion by extremism, realizing that radical ideas had seeped into the mainstream.

they were debating what it means to be muslim and confronting the future prospects of a region consumed by a cycle of violence. just two weeks ago, muslim extremists opened fire on muslim worshipers in a mosque in egypt, killing more than 300.

through my reporting, i met women who had removed the veil, islamic reformists who were challenging conventional sheikhs, groups of outspoken atheists, and young muslims turning to mystical sufism as an alternative to the austere salafi creed. eventually someone introduced me to esraa.

we want to hear from you the times would like to hear from women who have faced similar challenges as esraa did when she sought independence. we are especially interested in hearing from those whose personal values conflict with beliefs held by their family members, religion or countries. tell us your story below. required fields are marked with an asterisk. what, if anything, have you done to assert your independence? what struggles did you face, if any? * have the changes you've made to your life affected your relationships with family or friends? if so, how? * what is your name? * first and last preferred, please. where do you live? * what is your email address? * we won't share your contact information, but an editor or reporter might follow up with you. by submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyones rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. you are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of the new york times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. and you agree to our terms of service. thank you for your submission.

esraa was in high school when the revolution started. she took to the streets with her parents, celebrating mr. mubaraks fall and rejoicing over the brotherhoods victory in the countrys first democratic election.

her father, who died from cancer a few years after the revolution, was a devoted brotherhood member. her mother was less overtly political, but a brotherhood supporter nonetheless, and devout and traditional. when she circumcised esraa at the age of 14, she explained that the operation keeps a girl pure and respectable.

i chose to follow esraa for this documentary because she was remarkably thoughtful and uncharacteristically open. because of her candor, a strange familiarity developed between us. i wanted my film to feel intimate, but i also worried that esraa was revealing too much.

her every act was one of rebellion. living in a coed space with friends. showing her affection for a man who was not her husband. smoking cigarettes in public. investigating human rights abuses in secret.

advertisement continue reading the main story

she was politically cynical and now had her doubts about god. to do so, in her world, was to risk losing her family, her freedom and her life.

like almost every girl she knew, esraa started wearing a head scarf when she was in middle school. at the time, she thought she had chosen it.

but in college, when she joined student movements and led protests fighting to preserve the right of free expression, she started to realize how limited her choices were. when i looked to see what was wrong with me, i saw the veil, esraa told me in that first meeting.

it was a bold statement in a country where the large majority of women are still veiled and where the veil is loaded with meaning. it is modesty, it is ideology, it is culture, it is tradition, it is sacrifice, it is identity  ripping it off is akin to changing skins.

the first time esraa and i spoke, she was nervous. but as she relaxed and i began achieving the much-coveted fly on the wall status, i grew nervous.

we often filmed with our iphones to avoid drawing attention to esraa or to our work, especially when we were in public. and i reminded her repeatedly that i was a journalist, that the camera was rolling and that she had a mic attached to her. esraa laughed because she had stopped caring.

why take the gamble? i asked her on our last day of shooting.

because i need to have those safe spaces where i can express myself in an absolute way, without being judged, she answered. i dont need anyones sympathy or pity. i need to speak to people who will have respect for me and for my experience.

she saw in my camera an opportunity to be who she wanted to be. the small stage i offered esraa, the direct questions i asked her and the interest i took in her personal evolution were everything she craved. she understood the consequences of letting herself be heard.

advertisement continue reading the main story

i did, too, but i did not imagine that i would see them play out as soon as they did.

the last time i met esraa was in late november. i had not been able to reach her for days. she had changed her number and deactivated her facebook account.

her good friend sarah helped arrange our meeting. when i sat down with esraa, she told me she was hiding.

the story goes like this: in september, esraa attended a concert for a lebanese rock band whose lead singer is openly gay. it was in cairo, she was with her friends, the music was thumping, she was dancing, a friend lifted her up on his shoulders, and before she knew it, she had a rainbow flag in her hand.

without a moments hesitation, she waved the flag, high over her head. and her friend snapped a picture. esraa posted the photo to her facebook account accompanied with a post where she denounced discrimination.

a few other concertgoers waved the flag, too. the act, extraordinary in its audacity, provoked public outrage. and it set off a campaign of targeted arrests.

esraa was not at her mothers place when the police came for her. and she has not returned to visit since then. she left her job, she moved apartments and she has been living in a state of total paralysis.

in early december, there were no official charges, but those who had been arrested were accused of inciting debauchery and could face years in prison.

i reminded esraa of her words to me when we were filming: i am not scared of anything.

i asked her again if she was afraid.

it is not fear that is dominating me; it is despair, she said. but i have no regrets. i did nothing wrong.