ask anyone whos been in a serious car accident, and theyll swear that reality moves in slow motion as metal crumples, glass shatters and bones break.

that kind of event can change ones perspective, and for the photographer cig harvey, her brush with vehicular death in 2015 inspired her new series you an orchestra you a bomb, recently released by schilt publishing, which also opens as a solo exhibition at robert mann in new york on december 7. with its strong emphasis on evocative color and objects culled from the natural world, the project touches upon magic, mystery and fairy tales. one easily imagines narnia just through the wardrobe door or hogwarts awaiting at the end of the train ride. (surprisingly, ms. harvey, who was born in england, has never read the harry potter books.)

as is her custom, the series features ms. harveys six-year-old daughter, scout, along with other relatives and friends. and the narrative is clearly propelled by the motivations of a mother, one enraptured by life after a near-death experience.

the spark was ignited after i was in a serious car accident, she said. then i started to make work about my relationship to life itself, and how fragile that felt in that moment.

photo

while her previous projects, including the books gardening at night and you look at me like an emergency, featured images that were preconceived and carefully constructed, ms. harvey began shooting in a more documentary style after her accident, roaming around with a camera in hand. while she still poses her subjects, her creativity pushed her to explore the world further, and to allow life to present serendipitous moments, like an old man jumping from a dock into the sea, or a pregnant friend standing stock-still on a misty beach.

every day, i sought out in everyday places images that made me jolt; that created some type of awe, and made me gasp because it was so beautiful, she said. and most of them are just in my backyard.

her book and exhibit carefully recreate that sense of childhood wonder, mixing saturated colors with verdant symbols and engaging text, allowing viewers to contemplate that sense of the unknown, but from a place of joy rather than anxiety. ms. harveys stories  poetic interludes sprinkled through the photographic narrative  add to the feeling that one has climbed into the back of her head, like in the film being john malkovich, and reality is twisted as a result.

photo

whether its a childs tooth tied to red string, a platter of four-leaf clovers, a box full of butterflies, or a table covered with tangerines, that feeling of rapture, of youthful exuberance, permeates the pages. one vignette sums up her obsession with magic  with the things we feel but cannot understand:

at a science-themed birthday i sit with the 5-year-olds in the front row, gasping at the impossibility of it all. / i keep mixing up science and magic. / please do let me stop you, as you begin to explain the physics.

other artists, notably sally mann, have featured their children as a way of exploring universal themes, but the young women in this book seem like stand-ins for storybook characters. whether theyre holding dead bugs or peeking out from behind a red curtain, the feeling is hard to escape, particularly with an image near the books end that features scout dressed in a cape like little red riding hood.

because tragedy is always with us, fairy tales have traditionally dealt with themes of life and death in exaggerated ways, so to explain difficult ideas to children. as a mother, ms. harvey is clearly grappling with these issues that suffuse her photographs.

photo

i became a better photographer when i became mother, and by better, i mean the work got more complicated and less decorative, because my world became more complicated, she said. the world became more beautiful, and it also became more terrifying. this book is about those two extremes.

in the end, thats what ms. harvey hopes people will get from you an orchestra you a bomb  a sense of being transported and, in turn, transformed by a perspective that helps them appreciate the ephemeral quality of life.

everything feels very temporary, she said. we have these short lives. how can we pack as much into them, and love fiercely, protect fiercely, give fiercely, deal with difficult things, and come through other side?

jonathan blaustein is an artist and writer based in new mexico. he contributes regularly to the blog a photo editor.

follow @nytimesphoto on twitter. you can also find lens on facebook and instagram.