photo

burning bush, the 2014 movie by the legendary polish film director and solidarity activist agnieszka holland, was one of the most important cultural events in central europe in recent years. an ethical thriller, the film is set in 1969, soon after a czech student named jan palach set himself on fire to protest the soviet unions occupation of his country and draw attention to the authorities attempts to normalize czechoslovak life afterward. palachs aim, it seems, was to put a screeching halt to evils banalization.

three years after the films release, in the late afternoon of oct. 19, piotr szczesny, a 54-year-old father of two, set himself on fire in front of the communist-era palace of culture in warsaw. mr. szczesnys outcry was aimed against the far-right policies of the ruling law and justice party, which he believed represented a mortal danger to polands democracy. in a leaflet that he seems to have distributed before his suicide, he was unflinching: i love freedom first and that is why i decided to immolate myself, and i hope that my death will shake the consciences of many people.

i dont know if piotr szczesny ever watched burning bush, but his act undoubtedly echoes jan palachs sacrifice almost a half-century earlier.

mr. szczesnys self-immolation provoked heated arguments in poland. some interpreted his suicide as more the result of depression than politics. others feared that poland could face a wave of copycat suicides and recommended that the news media ignore the shocking deed. and there were those, like agnieszka holland herself, who were ready to hail mr. szczesny as the true successor of palach, and his gesture as a desperate undertaking to make poles aware of the gravity of the current situation.

advertisement continue reading the main story

fire destroys, ms. holland said, but it also illuminates. like anger.

this debate in poland highlights the thorny questions facing those who oppose the rising populist right in europe: what is the best way to fight a government you loathe but that has killed nobody, arrested few (if any) and come to power fairly  yet threatens to transform liberal democracies as we understand them?

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

where do you draw the line between living in a democracy in which the party you despise has won free elections and living in a dictatorship where the opposition may never be allowed to win again? is normalization of populists the biggest threat facing europe, or should we also fear the hysteria of populists opponents? and can the forms of resistance that worked against communist and fascist dictatorships work against the democratically elected illiberal governments of today?