photo

t magazine publishes 11 times a year, and the theme of each issue usually guides the content (at least to some degree): the womens fashion issue is about womens fashion; the design issue is about design; the travel issue is about  well, you get the idea.

but the holiday issue  our last of the year  is more open to interpretation. historically, this issue is defined by its cover subject, a person whom the staff believes has in some way defined the national cultural conversation over the past 12 months. this year, jay-z was our first choice. not only is there the fact of his most recent album, the confessional, searching 4:44 (nominated last week for eight grammys), but there is the entire arc of his professional life: other musicians have become moguls, of course, but few have done so as commandingly as he has. other musicians have created great albums, but few have done so for as many years, and with as much consistency, as he has.

by july, wed confirmed jay-zs participation, and then came the next challenge: who would interview him? if youre jay-z, youve talked to everyone: music critics, fellow musicians, novelists and even presidents. who could bring to this conversation the just-right blend of open-mindedness, curiosity and rigor?

and then i realized that the perfect person was closer than id thought: dean baquet, the executive editor of the new york times. i knew he was a great journalist  he had, after all, spent many years as an investigative reporter. and i had experienced firsthand his ability to be incisive while remaining compassionate, while he was interviewing me for my job as editor of t. our entertainment director, lauren tabach-bank, proposed the idea to jay-zs people, who immediately agreed. then, with a little help from sam dolnick, an assistant masthead editor, we presented the idea to mr. baquet  who generously agreed as well.

advertisement continue reading the main story

it was a perfect pairing. but it occurred to all of us that wed given ourselves the feat of trying to align the schedules of two of the busiest men in new york city. it took many conversations to set a date: sept. 29. besides impossible calendars, another thing mr. baquet and jay-z have in common is their love of african-american contemporary art. so when we decided to feature a portrait on the cover, i knew i wanted to commission an african-american artist to make it. i always tell ts editors that i want the artists and writers who shoot, paint or profile our subjects to feel somehow emotionally connected to the people theyre depicting. this doesnt necessarily mean that we, say, reflexively partner a black writer with a black subject. but some of jay-zs most profound and revelatory songs are in fact about being black in america, and i wanted a visual artist who explored similar ideas in his or her work. our in-house art expert, the staff editor m.h. miller, suggested a few artists, including henry taylor, who was everyones first choice, and our photo director, nadia vellam, and creative director, patrick li, immediately got to work securing his participation.

then, a few weeks before the interview was to happen, i went down to mr. baquets office to discuss his upcoming meeting with jay-z. an exceptional reporter is not unlike a therapist: his job is not to judge or assume, but rather to make the subject speak some truth about himself that he might not ever have considered. mr. baquet had enough questions to keep jay-z talking for an entire day  what is it like to be in a marriage that is also a source of artistic inspiration? as a black artist, did he feel he had a responsibility to his community, and what did that even mean, and was it even fair? what, if anything, does an artist owe his society?  but the ones that moved me the most were those that revealed a facet of mr. baquets own life, even as they revealed something similar in jay-zs. both have reached the top of realms  media; business  that are still overwhelmingly dominated by white men. both are living in very different circumstances from the ones imagined for them as children. their discussion, therefore, was as much an exchange between peers as an interview. theres an intimacy to their talk that feels natural and true, a mutual respect evident in how closely and attentively you can see each listening to the other.