but in adapting rosa guys novel my love, my love to the stage, lynn ahrens (book and lyrics) and stephen flaherty (music) faced the difficult problem of deepening our investment in the characters feelings and conflicts, the way the verse in shakespeare does, without overwhelming their power as prototypes. the authors nearly perfect solution is a pastiche caribbean score whose words are restrained and delicately rhymed but whose music is relentlessly grabby and emotional.

photo

later in their careers, as ms. ahrens and mr. flaherty took on big-boned projects like ragtime and anastasia, they produced big-boned songs that sometimes struck me as turgid. but in this, their first broadway outing, they were able to keep even the exuberant numbers in scale, so that a showstopper like mama will provide, sung to rattle the roof by the ferocious alex newell, doesnt literally stop the show. and the quiet establishing songs for ti moune (waiting for life) and daniel (some girls) do not get lost despite quietly sensitive renderings by hailey kilgore and isaac powell, making lovely broadway debuts.

if you wondered about mr. newells singing a song called mama will provide, thats surely something that mr. arden, the director, intends. mama is one of those temperamental gods, a mother earth figure called asaka, and in mr. ardens vision, the gods are gender fluid. (mr. newell played the transgender character unique adams on glee.) likewise the death god, papa ge, is played by a woman, merle dandridge, rocking a bra. more subtly, the actors, of a variety of skin tones, are not obsessively matched to one another or to the colors suggested by the script. lea salonga, the filipina broadway star, plays erzulie, the goddess of love; the heroic-voiced quentin earl darrington, as the water god agwe, is blue.

video

and guess what? it makes no difference.

or, rather, it does, by exemplifying the ludicrousness of such distinctions and underlining the shows bid to be seen as a universal story that every culture enacts and anyone can tell. (eight performers, called storytellers, have been added to the cast of this revival.) if mr. ardens casting choices also take some of the pressure off possible questions of cultural appropriation  he and the shows authors are white  so be it; the larger point is worth making right now.

video

but only if its made well, and mr. ardens staging serves his top-to-bottom terrific cast of black and hispanic and asian actors beautifully. in fleshing out the world of the story and annotating every corner of the audiences experience  hello, goat!  mr. arden gives the performers the kind of backdrop that both grounds them and provides contrast for their big, bold emotions. he has also aced every theatrical trick hes torn from the ancient handbook, freshening the show, and the tricks, in the process.

i stopped jotting down those tricks at a certain point, perhaps after a fan representing a storm gale blew my notebooks pages about. still, i recall that they included ti mounes split-second metamorphosis from child to young woman, the car accident that lands daniel in ti mounes care, a shadow play relating the islands history of class enmity, a secret switch of a sleeping body, a journey, a death, a flood and a firefly.

advertisement continue reading the main story

other effects are incremental: the gods, who begin, like everyone else in the show, as workaday members of the island community, only slowly take on their lordly affect and spectacular regalia. (asakas tablecloth skirt and a trash tiara for erzulie are among the many small delights of clint ramoss often hilarious costume design.) other effects are environmental, including the scenic design, a dense bricolage of found objects by dane laffrey that keeps revealing new surprises. at a certain point you may think youve spotted them all, but have you looked under the sand?

the hallmark ingenuity, warmth and intensity bordering on excess that characterize mr. ardens style is recapitulated everywhere within the production, from the frankly stupendous singing (chris fenwick is the music supervisor) to the electric choreography of camille a. brown. everyone is working on the same crammed page.

if all this is five percent too technicolor, five percent too illustrative, id rather have that than a production that is five percent too dour. once on this island is, after all, a sad story already, and mr. arden hasnt fiddled with that. (the text is barely changed.) so if ti mounes tragedy must end, like so many fables, in another miracle transformation, in our dark season, let it be a gorgeous one.