this is highlighted in the grid by 17as flipping ones lid (they must have known about the pizza torture) and 58as at the drop of a hat.

doesnt it feel like were seeing more themed or lightly themed weekend puzzles? i asked the puzzle editors if this was a new thing, and they claim its just a coincidence.

tricky clues

1a: i have been eating sashimi for years now, and i am just learning that its name translates to pierced flesh. coincidentally, i am not as hungry now as i was before.

15a: an ottoman can get two feet higher, because you put your feet up on it.

31a: wordplay alert! thanks for waiting is a great phrase, and today it refers specifically to the tips you leave for servers whom you are thanking for waiting on you.

49a: beam that might hit you hard made me laugh. its not a construction beam, today were supposed to be tossing back some jim beam.

2d: watch out for those veiled capitals! brave person, typically? could be a hero, but that b is capitalized because it is actually a proper name: were talking about the atlanta braves, and a typical brave would indeed be an atlantan.

45d: question everything on a friday. the type of state quarters? in todays puzzle is a palace, not a coin.

56d: very cute, but youll need to know some crosswordese for this one. tec is a slang word for detective, so cal tecs? is not the school, caltech, but the s.f.p.d.

advertisement continue reading the main story

constructor notes

bruce haight: i first submitted this puzzle in january of 2014. anna shechtman [will shortzs assistant at the time] wrote back: will is intrigued by your at the drop of a hat mini-themed 15x, whose strange symmetry effectively makes the black squares look like dropping hats. assuming this was your intention, though, will is not certain that mexican hat dance makes much sense as your second theme entry. this was a bit embarrassing, and i switched to hold on to your hat for the next couple of submissions, which failed for lack of sparkling fill. i decided to bring in a hired gun, and david steinberg rode in with his big white hat and saved the day. he didnt just blindly start working on better fill though; he first suggested we switch to flipping ones lid as the second theme entry and he then talked me into adding two blocks. this made the visual slightly less dramatic than my fish puzzle, but moving from 66 words to 70 made it way easier to come up with good fill. david is a master grid technician and i believe he has the most precisely scored word list on the planet, and he also has interned with will and joel for much of the past two summers. david has a great sense of humor too, so he is just fun to work with all around. you might think that with my age being 64 and davids age being 20 this would be close to a record for biggest gap, but he did one with bernice gordon when she was 100 and he was 17. david turns 21 on the day this puzzle is published and i think he has quite a future ahead of him. happy birthday, david! david steinberg: always a pleasure to work with bruce haight/mr. grid art. i fell in love with the hat concept at first sight, though boy, was that grid difficult to work with, given the constraints of the hats and the two 15s! the final product took many back-and-forths, so even if my word list is more fine-tuned than bruces (which is a big if), theres no way this would have turned out as well without his input every step of the way. keep your eye out for more from us in the coming months.

thanks for getting our weekend started off, mr. haight and mr. steinberg.

your thoughts?