but shepard explored his condition through his writing  in vivid, precise prose that transformed his worsening symptoms into something akin to poetry. he wrote in notebooks at first, as he always had, but when his condition grew more grave and he could no longer control his hands, he dictated into a recorder.

the resulting work, which knopf will publish on tuesday, is an unvarnished, intimate portrait of a man facing the end of his life, as he reflects on his past and observes how his own body has betrayed him.

hes watching himself as his life is ebbing away, and what sam does with this experience as its happening to him is turning it into this incredible prose, said luann walther, shepards longtime editor, who worked with him on about 20 books. its so direct, and its so emotional and haunting and moving.

photo

shepard was best known as an actor and playwright  he appeared in more than 50 films and wrote 55 plays, including true west, fool for love and the pulitzer prize-winning buried child. but he also frequently experimented with prose, and liked pushing genre boundaries, mixing autobiography with fiction.

with spy of the first person, he again blurred the line between fiction and memoir. he was adamant that he didnt want the book to be categorized as a novel, even though his publisher told him that could create marketing problems. he said, why does anybody need a label?  ms. walther said.

ms. walther first learned that shepard had lou gehrigs disease  a neurodegenerative disease that affects the nerve cells in the spinal cord and brain  in the fall of 2015. he had just finished a new manuscript, a work that he published in february.

he alluded to his condition in the book, titled the one inside, months before it would become public, in a passage that was so brief that ms. walther said she read right past it.

advertisement continue reading the main story

something in his body refuses to get up, he wrote. the appendages dont seem connected to the motor  whatever that is  driving this thing. they wont take direction  wont be dictated to  the arms, legs, feet, hands. nothing moves. nothing even wants to. the brain isnt sending signals.

when shepard began working on spy of the first person in early 2016, he could still write by hand. but a few months later, as his illness worsened, that became impossible. so his daughter, hannah, bought him a recorder, and would set it up by him and leave him to dictate in the garden of his home in kentucky. when he was ready for a break, he would signal to her, and she would come and turn it off. his sisters, roxanne and sandy, transcribed the tapes and gave the pages back to him to read over.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

his mind was like a steel trap, his sister sandy rogers said. he would dictate for an hour and a half or two hours from the top to the bottom, and he would never change anything.

shepard blended fragments of the past with the present, as he often did in his plays. in one chapter, the narrator, who seems to be addressing his children, says that theres some things you dont know about me mainly because they happened before you were born, and recounts his time living in a condemned building in downtown manhattan.

later, he describes going out to a mexican restaurant with his family, pushed in a wheelchair by his sons jesse and walker: ill never forget the strength i felt from my two boys behind me, he wrote.

photo

he wanted them to know how much he loved them, ms. rogers said of shepards children. he knew what was happening.

the process felt foreign to him at first. the tools he had always relied on  his pen and his typewriter  no longer served him. instead of writing in solitude, as he was accustomed to, he needed near constant physical assistance.

the singer-songwriter patti smith, who was a close friend of shepards, came to visit him several times while he was working on the book, and helped him to edit, rearrange and shape the manuscript. (ms. smith is participating in a reading and musical performance in honor of shepard and the book on tuesday at st. ann and the holy trinity church in brooklyn).

he was always a very private writer, and the fact that he was now having to involve his family in his process was not easy for him, walker shepard, one of shepards two sons, said in an email. i think it was a relief for him to work with patti because she is not family.

advertisement continue reading the main story

but he also grew interested in how the prose he dictated sounded different from what he had written before, more spontaneous and musical, his daughter hannah said.

ms. shepard said it was in keeping with her fathers character for him to continue working, even when circumstances made it nearly impossible.

the way he went through the world was as a writer, she said. that drive and desire was never going to diminish.

shepard gave his family members specific instructions on how he wanted the book to be published, and even chose the cover image, an eerie black and white shot of an older man staring up at circling birds, by the photographer graciela iturbide.

one of the most moving moments in the book occurs before the story even begins. in a heart-rending inversion of a typical dedication page, where the author often thanks his or her family, spy of the first person is dedicated to the author himself: sams children, hannah, walker and jesse would like to recognize their fathers life and work and the tremendous effort he made to complete his final book.