i also have the nurse jamie acellerator device. it helps relax my jaw  i clench when i sleep. and i have one of those weird, led scary face mask things. i bought it online. i swear led lights help clear up my skin. i do lots of trips to china for work, and they have everything. im sure half of it doesnt do anything, but then the other half is amazing.

photo

makeup

if im not working, i keep it pretty simple. i use urban decay one & done foundation and the troublemaker mascara. its really good because it gets all of my stray lashes. i do a tiny bit of eye shadow on my lids  my favorite palette is the naked 1, which are bronzes, golds and neutrals  and then lip balm. i also like to do a little bit of contouring on my jaw and cheek if im going somewhere. and i love highlighting. it gives you a unicorn effect.

fragrance

i have a fragrance cabinet. i collect different fragrances when i travel. a friend of mine got me tom ford neroli portofino forte when we spent a week in ibiza. she said it was so we could always remember this trip. then i have this wild-looking lubin called upper ten; it looks like an old ladys perfume. i was in new zealand when i picked it up. it smells like heaven.

 la rose from maison francis kurkdjian. i was in rome shooting john wick when i found it. and theres a cool perfume i love when i dont want to smell overbearing in a meeting: escentric molecules.

photo

hair

in a dream world, my hair is leonardo dicaprio from the 90s  the romeo & juliet era. right now, its a couple centimeters off that. its a medium brown with lighter highlights. i had it dyed green for xxx and then black for another role. its taking a while to get it back from its super-fried condition.

my friend joey created this company called eleven australia. he uses a lot of natural ingredients. the shampoo and conditioner smell like coconut and remind me of the beach. i also like shu uemura. i can never pronounce it  its too fancy for me. the eleven miracle hair treatment is really good. i always use that when i blow out my hair. i also like the r & co dry shampoo paste, but its literally like i paid for a bottle of dirt. its great, perfect dirt, though!

other services

i love meditation. i love cleansing my chakras and getting crystals and lighting candles. i take about 30 minutes to an hour to focus on calming and cleansing and getting rid of anxiety and getting out of my head. i do a lot of my own stunts so i get massage and acupuncture. i dont love the needles. youd think with all my tattoos, id be fine with them.

advertisement continue reading the main story

when im in l.a., i go to dr. khalsa, an eastern doctor. i have a western doctor and an eastern doctor, and i see them for different things or for the same thing to see what theyll prescribe. at dr. khalsa, theyll do allergy tests, acupuncture, vitamin drips and cupping. i had a lot of skin problems for a while. and every time i ate, i would get crazy bloating even if it was just an apple. it turns out i had sibo. you have to fast for a day and then cut out certain things. my skin cleared up, and it changed everything for me.

diet and fitness

ive been an on-and-off vegan for 15 years. i dont drink. the only thing i never eat is red meat. i did reintroduce fish at one point because we need it for our brains. then i had some tests done, and it turned out i had crazy mercury poisoning. i was only eating fish  maybe, three or four times a week at that point. i had to quit altogether. it took me six months to get down to a good level.

i have a great trainer. his name is patrick murphy. i met him through john wick because he was training keanu. hes so different. youre at the gym and everyone is lifting a gazillion pounds, and youre just standing against the wall moving your hands like a butterfly. you feel like the crazy person, but hes not just putting you through the usual drills. i have a bad lower back, so i do more body weight and low-impact exercises. yoga and stretching is a big part of my routine. i get up at 6 every morning, lie down on a yoga mat and do an hour of strength and stretching. it gets me centered.