the shows creators first worked together on go-go boy interrupted a comedic web series directed by mr. black, in which mr. fowlie played an aging go-go boy.

photo

for the longest time mr. fowlies friends suggested that he should write a comedy based on his own life. both my parents met in a mental institution and i was in a foster home, he explained. i tried to write about that but it was so sad.

inspiration hit the second time he watched damien chazelles academy award-winning musical. we wanted to do the show once as a joke, mr. fowlie said. but in an ironic twist, mias show was terrible and ours is in new york off broadway.

it is now playing at subculture, after a run in los angeles that was attended by the likes of melissa mccarthy, helen hunt and ms. stones mother.

mr. fowlie and mr. black recently sat down to talk about their show and its cinematic inspiration, after a rehearsal that featured several costume changes and worries about misplaced stuffed animals. an edited version of the conversation follows.

how many times did you watch la la land to make this show?

jimmy fowlie more than 10 times. we were looking for clues, and theres this innocuous moment in the film when mia tells her roommates shes writing a play, and theres a close-up of what shes written. its something like genevieve walks in, shes wearing a trench coat and a cigarette in hand. she stops, blinks, which is how our play begins. its all on-the-nose dramatics.

youre not doing an emma stone impression. but what would be the most challenging aspect of her to capture?

advertisement continue reading the main story

fowlie our mia just really wants to show you how great everything is. holding that facade is hard. emma stone does it so well.

photo

photo

why do you think the movie became so polarizing?

jordan black its a musical, so people who love musicals had certain expectations, and they wanted great dancing and singing.

fowlie my feeling is if you cant handle ryan goslings singing voice you dont deserve his speaking voice.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

by exploring the pitfalls of putting on a one-person show, do you deal with your own fears?

fowlie ive always loved characters who are bombing but dont realize it. one of my friends pointed out that maybe subconsciously that gives me a safe space, because if the show were putting on is supposed to be bad, theres no way we can get it wrong.

black will ferrell has said a lot of his characters have unearned confidence. i love that.

at the end of the movie, mia has become a star, comes back to the cafe where she worked and is very nice to people who work there. if you become a superstar, to where would you want to return?

fowlie id go back to college and tell my classmates, and you thought i wasnt gonna make it!

black i worked in a supermarket, so id just be nicer to the employees. people can be so mean to you when you work in supermarkets.

fowlie youre such a bragger.

mia is obsessed with her legacy. how would you want people to remember you?

black as a man who had a full head of hair, 20 more pounds of muscle and could dance like michael jackson.

fowlie as a man who liked wigs and had a tattoo that says wall painting.