how many people told elon musk, you dont have any hope of getting into the car business? he said.

mahindra is a major producer of cars and trucks in india and south korea, but until now it was mainly known in the united states as the worlds leading maker of tractors. mr. mahindra said detroit was a focal point for growth for the companys american businesses, which also include manufacturing electric bikes and scooters.

we have a responsibility to contribute to the resurgence of detroit, mr. mahindra said at the plants opening ceremony. that means jobs, and that means investment.

while the planned production volume pales in comparison with the output of large, mainstream auto plants, the factory underscores that the detroit area is again attracting automotive investment.

the region is still a prime source of engineering talent and manufacturing know-how, as well as a technology incubator for electric cars and self-driving systems. mahindra already has a design and engineering center in troy, half an hour north of detroit, that turns out prototypes of future vehicles.

other foreign companies have also made big investments in the detroit area and throughout the upper midwest. chinese firms have bought a former general motors steering-gear division in saginaw, mich., and an automotive glass plant in moraine, ohio. one of the largest auto suppliers in detroit is the indian firm sakthi automotive, which is expanding its operations into a long-shuttered high school on the citys hardscrabble southwest side.

detroits mayor, mike duggan, has made rebuilding the citys depressed industrial base a priority, and last year lured the auto-parts supplier flex-n-gate  owned by a pakistani native, shahid khan  to construct a $95 million factory near downtown.

advertisement continue reading the main story

its the kind of development that detroit has not been able to compete for in recent years, mr. duggan said at the plants groundbreaking last year. but we are starting to compete now.

photo

mahindras footprint in the detroit area is small so far, with $230 million invested in the plant, the technical center and two related operations that employ about 270 people combined. the auburn hills site where the company is building its factory, in detroits northern suburbs, had been empty for years after housing an engineering firm.

the company expects to build about 5,000 off-road vehicles in the plants first year, then add capacity to more than double the volume.

by comparison, the last full-scale plant constructed in detroit  a fiat chrysler factory that opened in 1992  makes more than 300,000 jeeps annually.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

mahindra also assembles tractors at several american plants and employs about 3,000 workers over all across the united states, part of a worldwide work force of more than 200,000.

if mahindra aims to make the leap in the american market from tractors and off-road models to cars or sport-utility vehicles, it has several options.

mahindra builds and sells its own branded s.u.v.s and pickups in its home market and elsewhere in asia, and could import variations of those vehicles into the united states. it also owns the south korean carmaker ssangyong motor and the italian design and engineering firm pininfarina, both of which could participate in producing models for the american market.

still, analysts foresee a tough challenge for any new entries into the hypercompetitive american auto market. after two consecutive years of record sales, demand has slipped in 2017. moreover, automakers like general motors, volkswagen and toyota are broadening their product lineups with both conventional gasoline-powered models and new electrified vehicles.

it will be an uphill battle for mahindra, said michelle krebs, a longtime analyst with the firm autotrader. tesla has done a brilliant job building a new brand, but its very expensive to do that.

advertisement continue reading the main story

yet it is hardly surprising that mahindra has chosen to put down roots in detroit to help it achieve its ambitions of becoming a player in the american market.

this is where the expertise is for building vehicles, ms. krebs said. youve got the talent here and the suppliers, and it is the center of excellence for so much of the industrys research and development activities.

manufacturing employment in the detroit area declined substantially during the recession, which crippled auto sales and forced g.m. and the former chrysler to seek government bailouts and bankruptcy protection to survive. according to the bureau of labor statistics, manufacturing jobs declined nearly 40 percent in the metropolitan area from 2005 to 2009, and have yet to bounce back completely.

but the revival of the overall market for new vehicles, as well as the return of the detroit car companies to financial health, has spurred a steady comeback for auto jobs  particularly in the high-tech sector supporting advances in autonomous driving and electric vehicles.

and while the detroit area is studded with empty lots that once had factories, the mahindra plant is a promising sign of blue-collar jobs on the horizon. the company expects to add another 400 jobs in the area by 2020, investing an additional $600 million  and to continue to be a factor in the auto capitals resurgence.

it is great to be part of this comeback story, said rajan wadhera, president of mahindras global automotive business. we have a long and profitable and mutually beneficial relationship ahead of us.