judah friedlander

america is the greatest country in the united states (netflix)

judah friedlander, who has been performing regularly since 1989 without putting out an album or special, uses more than a dozen punch lines in the first two minutes of his new special, a pace he sustains for more than two hours. if comedy were measured by volume, an argument could be made that no one offers a better deal on netflix.

yet despite this density of jokes, mr. friedlander  whose stand-up persona is a know-it-all boaster nicknamed the world champion  never seems like hes in a rush. his relaxed slacker affect (a shaggy beard and trucker cap are constants) is such a strange fit for his egomania that it cant help but make you laugh. he specializes in crowd work and self-evidently absurd arguments, like making the case that other countries hate americans because we have the best cheese in the world.

in the age of trump, mr. friedlanders preposterous arrogance, which extends to believing he can solve every political problem in a quick sound bite, does not seem so silly, which he seems to understand. his jokes arrive refracted through a left-leaning lens, and while he doesnt parody the president, he increasingly seems to pivot off him. we dont need to bring back coal, he says dismissively. but i am going to bring back all the vcr repairman jobs.

yamaneika saunders

comedy central stand-up presents (amazon)

after explaining that a bride for whom she was the maid of honor asked her to wear a pumpkin-spice-colored dress, yamaneika saunders freezes, silent onstage, waiting a beat. then her face seems to retreat, flattening out, her pupils dancing from one side to the other and back again, veering farther from her nose than seems possible. this contortion transitions into a mask of confusion as her shoulders rise, the only help her body offers to the wonderful above-the-neck physical comedy that turns the punch line that follows into a mere coda. (thats not even a color. thats a drink at starbucks.)

ms. saunders is a magnetic live performer who stood out on oxygens short-lived reality show about female stand-ups, funny girls, and she can do a lot with a little. she finds all kinds of laughs milking a pause, running through expressions, steadily ramping up the emotion with gusto. she sets up her jokes crisply, pursues familiar juxtapositions (sex and religion always fit snugly) and then sells the hell out of the punch lines.

is she better live? of course. but this comedy central special is still really good. she doesnt waste a second on anxious embarrassment after confessing that she lost her virginity at age 27, heading right to anger, explaining how her grandmothers warning that jesus is watching paralyzed her. when i had sex for the first time and the guy called out, jesus! i was like, where?  its not a bad line, but what makes you really laugh is the panic on her face.

shane torres

established 1981 (itunes)

photo

shane torres also recently released his first comedy central half-hour, which is funny but not as much as this longer audio-only album. mr. torres has a laconic drawling delivery with deliberate pacing, placing him firmly in the tradition of dry deadpan specialists like todd barry and tig notaro. but his style is warmer, relying on punch lines with corkscrew turns that have moments of vulnerability and even melancholy. you guys ever buy a bottle of your ex-girlfriends shampoo  not like from her, but her brand  wash your hair with it and then sit around and smell yourself? he asks, pausing, before telegraphing defensiveness. me neither. be weird if one of you did that.

while hes best known for a bit ferociously defending guy fieri against his critics, his tone on this hot take is less polemical than wistful. as far as i can tell, he says with exasperation, all he ever did was follow his dreams. in the rest of his act, he brings up disappointing romances and the deaths of loved ones almost offhandedly, adding to the mood of his self-deprecating jokes  like one about his sexual moves, which number two: i have the one where i do all of the work, and the one where i dont do any of it. pause. that ones my favorite.