photo

comparatively speaking, young people in the united states and england do not move much. studies indicate that most children reach their activity peak at about age 7 and become more sedentary throughout adolescence. many parents probably hope that shiny new technologies, such as fitbits and other physical-activity monitors, might inspire our children to become more active.

but a recent study published in the american journal of health education finds that the gadgets frequently have counterproductive impacts on young peoples attitudes about exercise and the capabilities of their own bodies.

the new study, conducted by psychologists from brunel university london and the university of birmingham, involved 100 healthy boys and girls ages 13 and 14 from two middle schools in england. the schools were far apart geographically and socioeconomically, representing a broad cross section of adolescent society.

the researchers began by interviewing the young people and asking them to fill out psychological questionnaires about how they felt about exercise and their fitness. then the scientists gave everyone an activity monitor, which came preprogrammed with a goal of 10,000 steps each day. the users activities could be recorded on a leader board shared with friends, which would show who had been the most and least active.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the teenagers were asked to use the monitors for two months, and then complete more questionnaires and participate in focus-group discussions. during the focus groups, almost all the young people expressed initial enthusiasm for the monitors and said they had at first become more active.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

but the allure soon faded. after about a month, most of the teenagers had begun to find the monitors chiding and irksome, making them feel lazy if they did not manage 10,000 steps each day. many also said they now considered themselves more physically inept than they had at the studys start, often because they were rarely near the top of the activity leader boards. most telling, a large percentage of the adolescents reported feeling less motivated to be active now than before getting the monitor. (the researchers did not directly track changes in the young peoples activity levels, because the study focused on psychology.)

the problem with the monitors seemed to be that they had left the teenagers feeling pressure and with little control over their activities, as well as self-conscious about their physical abilities, said charlotte kerner, a lecturer in youth sport and physical education at brunel university london, who led the study. the result was frustration, self-reproach  and less, not more, movement.