in recent inspections of 4,200 public housing apartments with possible lead paint and tenants with a child under age 6, more than half were found to have peeling or otherwise damaged paint. only in the last week, as pressure has mounted, has the city said it would provide free lead testing to all children in those apartments.

with the scope of the health risks still unclear, a class-action case against new york city, in connection with the failure to conduct lead inspections in public housing, is now being prepared by a lead lawyer for families suing over lead poisoning in flint, mich., corey m. stern.

the city seems most vulnerable to assertions that critical communication failures among senior city administration officials potentially put thousands of children in public housing at risk.

the officials, including deputy mayors alicia glen and herminia palacio, corporation counsel zachary carter and several agency heads, appear to have not shared crucial information that might have revealed months earlier that the city had stopped inspecting for lead paint.

indeed, a timeline of events assembled from public documents and information released by the city suggests that top officials were slow to realize any problem existed, and then compounded that failing by not taking immediate steps to inform the public after they learned of the issue.

the lack of disclosure culminated in a false filing to the federal government in october 2016, certifying that lead paint inspections had been conducted  though city leaders knew they had not been.

two senior officials involved in operations resigned last month after the investigation department issued a report on the false federal filings by the authority. a third was demoted.

photo

mr. de blasio has resisted calls for ms. olatoye to be removed; she is expected to testify on tuesday at a city council hearing looking into the inspections.

advertisement continue reading the main story

in hindsight, should communication have been better? absolutely, ms. olatoye said in an interview. but what we needed to ensure, so that we could confirm, was that we had eliminated the risk of a potential lead-based hazard.

the problems began in 2012, when a loosening of federal requirements for general inspections of apartment conditions resulted in the city, under mayor michael r. bloomberg, dropping all visual inspections for lead. when mr. de blasio became mayor in 2014, the tests were not restarted; mr. de blasio has acknowledged responsibility for the lapse, but also has been eager to blame his predecessor.

as a dad, mr. de blasio said at a monday news conference in response to a question, i would be pissed off that in 2012 somebody stopped it.

the housing authority is required by federal law to conduct annual checks of all its units that might have lead paint, about 55,000 units out of some 180,000. separately, a 2004 city law requires checks of the roughly 4,200 such apartments with a child under 6.

in mid-2015, according to the citys department of investigation, several top housing authority officials knew that they were not in compliance with the city law but told investigators that they did not raise the issue with ms. olatoye.

that fall, the office of the united states attorney for the southern district of new york sent separate notifications to three city agencies seeking documents as part of a broad investigation into public housing and homeless shelters. the notifications, known as civil investigative demands, sought a range of documents relating to the housing authority and the department of homeless services.



the housing authority notification said federal investigators were seeking records as part of a false claims inquiry, according to a person who has reviewed the notification. the investigators also sought certifications by the housing authority of its compliance with federal rules on lead paint, the person said.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the notification, dated oct. 29, 2015, asked for records related to lead or lead paint on several different pages, among other aspects of housing operations, the person said.

advertisement continue reading the main story

days later, on nov. 9, 2015, the health department received a notification that also specified that investigators were looking into the housing authority and the department of homeless services as part of a false claims inquiry, and requested documents related to lead paint.

top city officials at the agencies, including the mayor, have insisted that no one put together the pieces at that point.

on nov. 3, 2015  five days after federal prosecutors sent their demand to the housing authority, but according to city hall, a day before it was received  mr. de blasio and ms. olatoye had a one-on-one phone call, logged in his public schedule. aides to ms. olatoye said they discussed sidewalk sheds at a manhattan housing complex, and not the federal investigation.

i talk to city hall and the mayor a lot, ms. olatoye said in an interview. i do not remember the details of that call.

photo

ms. olatoye said the authority was asked by prosecutors to provide a huge amount of materials on a broad range of topics, including sanitary and maintenance conditions, leaks, mold, lead paint and other issues. the request to two other agencies, the health department and the department of homeless services, related to lead paint. the health department was asked for information on tests showing the blood lead levels of public housing residents and people staying in homeless shelters, as well as information about lead paint testing in those facilities, according to the federal request, which was subsequently made public.

ms. olatoye said that no one told her at the time that investigators had also contacted the health department with questions that focused on lead paint.

a spokesman for the law department declined to address specific questions about how it coordinated information about the investigation between agencies.

even after the prosecutors request to the health department became public in march 2016, mr. de blasio and ms. olatoye gave no indication that they knew that the lead paint inspections had stopped. that month, the mayor told reporters that the city had a very stringent inspection effort in place for lead.

advertisement continue reading the main story

likewise, ms. olatoye testified before the city council on march 28, 2016, that we remain in compliance with our local law.

within days, ms. olatoye apparently learned that the testimony was false. on april 6, she told deputy mayor alicia glen, her boss at city hall, about the local law 1 issue, according to a spokeswoman for the authority.

it would be weeks before anyone told mr. de blasio, he has said. he has not provided a precise date.

the first time ms. olatoye made a public acknowledgment of the problem was last july, when she amended the citys false federal filing of october 2016 and acknowledged that it had not been in compliance with federal rules.

that same month, kyan dickerson, 4, tested positive for the presence of lead in his blood, according to a federal lawsuit filed by his mother, sherron paige.

hes permanently brain damaged as a result of it, said her lawyer, mr. stern, who also represents the flint families. ms. paige and her son lived at 791 hicks street in brooklyn, in the red hook east complex of the citys housing authority, during the period when lead paint inspections were not being performed.

the city has said that the number of children with lead paint poisoning has declined in new york over the years. from 2010 to 2015, in response to positive tests for lead in child residents, 17 public housing apartments of 121 tested were found to have a lead paint hazard and were abated.

since discovering the inspection lapses, the city rushed in 2016 to address chipping or peeling paint in 2,363 apartments. city hall conceded on friday that even that work might have been compromised: the workers and vendors employed in that effort did not have the proper training, an oversight reported by the wall street journal. (new training started in august, a city hall spokeswoman said.)

we are still learning as we go along, mr. de blasio said last week, promising further updates.

the city now says that it will provide free lead testing to all families in the 2,363 housing authority apartments where a potential lead paint hazard was found.

like in flint, often how people react to a crisis is worse than the crisis itself  in this case, not notifying parents that their children were being exposed to lead, said mr. stern, who filed the suit in september.

advertisement continue reading the main story

then he started putting out information that was at best mistaken, he said of the mayor. at worst, he was lying.