photo

turning point: chinas hollywood investment frenzy is at a crossroads.

a man had a dream in which he was told where he could find fantastic wealth in a remote place. when he awoke, he instantly set off to find it. after a long journey full of danger and hardship, he arrived at the place in his dream. a local man who had heard about the dreamers purpose laughed loud and long, saying that he had dreamed three times about a house where great treasure was buried under a fountain. it dawned on the dreamer that the place the local was describing was his very own yard. he returned home and found the treasure.

like the man in this tale, the chinese movie industry has been on a long journey to find its place in the world. in 1994, the fugitive became the first major hollywood film to be released in the country in decades. audiences were enthralled with the movies fast pace and sound effects, and it proved to be a runaway success. since then, the chinese film industry has balanced a complex relationship with hollywood.

photo

although there has been a dramatic slowdown in chinas box-office numbers  movie-ticket revenue rose just 3.7 percent in 2016 after growing by an average of 35 percent per year from 2011 to 2015  the country still has a huge movie market, with theaters continuing to expand into more rural areas and audiences proving that they have a voracious appetite for hollywood action films. so much so that recently, hollywood has even started to make movies with china in mind, casting chinese movie stars with tremendous box-office power and tweaking the plots and aesthetics of films to win over chinese moviegoers.

many in chinas film industry, from young scriptwriters to senior critics, know hollywoods dramatic structure all too well and advocate its tropes and tactics. and many american offerings introduced in the chinese market, regardless of quality, continue to do well among chinese audiences, especially with young people, whose tastes and viewing habits have been shaped by hollywood movies and tv shows. like audiences in other developing countries, those in china tend to have a worldview filtered by and focused on the united states, even though the united states doesnt mean the whole world and hollywood isnt the worlds only movie industry.

photo

like an ocean that refuses no rivers, chinas movie industry will continue to influence and allow itself to be influenced by its international counterparts. china needs the united states, and the united states needs china. but at the moment, a large discrepancy exists in that very few chinese movies are able to enter the american market and attract a significant audience. chinese audiences provide hollywood with huge profits, but what does chinas film industry gain in return?

advertisement continue reading the main story

whats more, homegrown movies in china sometimes face steep challenges in the shadow of hollywood blockbusters. we are right to be concerned about the succession and inheritance of chinas film traditions as well as the potential loss of our unique values and aesthetics.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

despite these worries, like a boat that sails with the flow, we will continue to work on maintaining our distinctiveness while acknowledging the benefits of this cultural exchange. just think how corn, tomatoes and sweet potatoes came from other lands but are able to thrive in china and provide nourishment all the same.