photo

a wayward tweet on saturday has set off renewed accusations that president trump obstructed justice by impeding the investigation into russian meddling in the 2016 elections.

the known facts are too weak to support any federal prosecution, not to mention one as momentous as indicting a sitting president. but even if mr. trump did illegally conspire to improve relations with russia, his critics are pursuing their quarry down the wrong path. impeachment  not criminal prosecution  is the tool for a corrupt sitting president.

the tweet in question contained a seemingly explosive claim that sent critics of mr. trump into a frenzy: i had to fire general flynn because he lied to the vice president and the fbi. he has pled guilty to those lies. it is a shame because his actions during the transition were lawful. there was nothing to hide! if the president knew that mr. flynn had lied to mike pence and to the f.b.i. about his conversations with the russian ambassador, then the president had knowingly obstructed justice when he asked the f.b.i. director james comey on feb. 14 to let flynn go because he was a good guy. according to the presidents critics, mr. trump then escalated his obstruction by firing mr. comey because of the russia inquiry.

no responsible federal prosecutor would dream of stepping into a trial court with such a weak case. this is a tweet, hardly an admission of guilt. and on sunday, mr. trumps personal attorney, john dowd, made the case even weaker when he said that he had ghost-written the tweet.

advertisement continue reading the main story

mr. trumps comments to mr. comey (if true  the only source for them is a memo by mr. comey) do not qualify as corruption, a threat or coercion as required by federal obstruction law. a mother might make the same plea for her son, or a priest for a parishioner. asking for leniency does not constitute obstruction, regardless of whether the crime being investigated is a violation of the logan act, which forbids private individuals from negotiating with foreign governments, or the false statements act. mr. trump most likely fired mr. comey not to thwart the investigation  mr. trump could have just ordered it ended, which he still has not done  but because mr. comey refused to affirm publicly that the president was not a target.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

but even if the facts rose to the level of obstruction, most legal scholars agree that prosecutors cannot bring charges against a sitting president. the constitution imposes on the president the duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, which vests the authority to oversee all federal law enforcement. as alexander hamilton observed in federalist 70, good government requires energy in the executive, and a vigorous president is essential to the protection of the community from foreign attacks and the steady administration of the laws. ever since the framing, presidents have enjoyed the right to drop prosecutions as a waste of resources. indeed, this is the very theory that president barack obama raised when he unilaterally reduced the enforcement of the immigration laws under the dreamers and deferred action for parents of americans programs.