why the cvs-aetna merger could benefit consumers consolidation in health care has generally not been good for americans. heres why this seems to be an exception.

there are reasons for consumers to be optimistic about cvss reported purchase of aetna for $69 billion on sunday.

its one of the largest health care mergers in history, and in general, consolidation in health care has not been good for americans.

but by disrupting the pharmacy benefits management market, and by more closely aligning management of drug benefits and other types of benefits in one organization, cvs could be acting in ways that ultimately benefit consumers.

you probably know cvs as a retail pharmacy chain  it runs nearly 10,000 drugstores. but over the years, it has diversified. it now runs walk-in clinics, including in target stores. and it runs one of the largest specialty pharmacies, dispensing high-priced drugs that require special handling.

image cvs runs nearly 10,000 drugstores. credit andrew kelly/reuters

in a big move a decade ago that set the stage for more recent developments, cvs purchased a majority of shares of caremark for nearly $27 billion to enter the pharmacy benefits management business.

pharmacy benefits managers are companies that help insurers devise and run their drug benefits, including serving as middlemen in negotiating prices between insurers and drug manufacturers.

many health industry experts believe that pharmacy benefits managers effectively increase prescription drug prices to raise their own profits. this is because they make money through opaque rebates that are tied to drug prices (so their profits rise as those prices do). competition among pharmacy benefits management companies could push these profits down, but it is a highly concentrated market dominated by a few firms, cvs among the largest.

but cvss recent moves may shake up an already changing pharmacy benefits landscape. in october, the insurer anthem announced its intentions to part ways with the pharmacy benefits management firm express scripts. instead, it will partner with cvs to develop its own pharmacy management business.

anthem would not be the first insurer to forgo external pharmacy benefits management and take on the role internally. the insurer unitedhealth group also runs a leading pharmacy benefit management business, optumrx. and cvss purchase of aetna would also remove it as a middleman acting between that insurer and drug companies.

while its still early, the moves by anthem and aetna have the feeling of the beginning of the end of the stand-alone pharmacy benefits manager business, said craig garthwaite, a health economist with northwestern universitys kellogg school of management. these insurers, and unitedhealth group, have concluded that outsourcing pharmacy benefits management may not serve their interests.

this removal of profit-taking middlemen could be good for consumers in the short run if it leads to lower drug prices. in the long run, it might be harder for new insurers to enter the market because they wont be able to negotiate lower drug prices than the larger firms, mr. garthwaite said. this could result in further concentration in the health insurance market. that could harm future consumers, though not in ways we can predict today.

the cvs-aetna deal would be just another of the many recent mergers across business lines in health care. insurers are buying or partnering with health care providers. health systems are offering insurance. hospitals are employing physicians. even amazon is jumping into the pharmacy business in some states. this may be part of the motivation for cvs to buy aetna  defensive jockeying to maintain access to a large customer base that might otherwise begin to fill drug prescriptions online.

typically, mergers in the sector have led to higher prices and no better outcomes. but a cvs-aetna merger might be different because their business lines complement each other. the most significant overlap is in the management of medicare drug benefits: both companies offer stand-alone medicare prescription drug plans.

but there is a lot of competition in the medicare drug plan market, so this overlap may not be a leading area of concern.

the cvs-aetna merger is primarily about a supplier and its customer joining forces, what economists call a vertical merger. this type of merger can enhance a firms ability to coordinate across interlocking lines of business.

in this case, cvs-aetna might more effectively manage certain patients with chronic conditions (those insured by aetna), reducing costs. lets imagine that aetna could leverage cvss pharmacies and clinics to help patients  who require medications to avoid hospitalizations  stay on their drug regimen. that could save the merged organization money. it could also translate into both better care and lower premiums, though theres no guarantee at this stage of either.

one source of optimism: research shows that coordinating pharmacy and health benefits has value because it removes perverse incentives that arise when drug and nondrug benefits are split across organizations. when pharmacy benefits are managed by a company thats not on the hook for the cost of other care, like hospitalization, it doesnt have as strong an incentive for increasing access to drugs that reduce other types of health care use. that could end up costing more over all.

so theres reason to believe that a combined cvs-aetna might find ways to reduce costs  and represent an instance when consumers actually come out ahead after health care consolidation.









austin frakt is director of the partnered evidence-based policy resource center at the v.a. boston healthcare system; associate professor with boston universitys school of public health; and adjunct associate professor with the harvard t.h. chan school of public health. he blogs at the incidental economist, and you can follow him on twitter. @afrakt

sign up for the upshot newsletter get the best of the upshots news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. see sample please verify youre not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * required field you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times products and services. thank you for subscribing. view all new york times newsletters. an error has occurred. please try again later. you are already subscribed to this email. view all new york times newsletters. sign up