paul g. lannon jr., a lawyer at holland & knight, which represents many private schools, says that in cases that are outside the statute of limitations, schools are under no legal obligation to pay, but they still sometimes offer substantial amounts. mr. lannon said hed seen more than one claim settle outside the statute for more than $300,000.

i really see that the trend is schools are focused on trying to do the right thing, trying to help survivors heal, mr. lannon said.

stephen fife was kissed and groomed over the course of two school years by a teacher at horace mann school in the bronx, who once tried to hold him down and rape him. he complained to an administrator at the time, and was told that by pressing the allegation, you will only tarnish yourself, he recalled.

advertisement continue reading the main story

when he settled with the school about four years ago, he was decades outside the statute, and that was a crucial piece of the negotiations. he said that while the money he received was beneficial, it was about a fifth of what he was led to expect by his lawyer.

he said the school kept going back to the statute, saying, in effect, what were giving you is from the goodness of our hearts because we dont have to give you anything.

horace mann did not respond to multiple requests for comment.

pingry does not dispute that mr. alton preyed on its students. in its report about sexual abuse released in the spring, it said mr. alton abused at least 27 students during his tenure there, and that faculty members observed behavior that should have raised alarms. why did he have students in his office behind a locked door? when adults knocked, why was there a delay in answering?

the report said that in 1980 mr. alton, who left the school at the end of the 1978 school year, pleaded guilty in new jersey to three counts of private lewdness and three counts of impairing morals of a minor after playing strip poker and masturbating with three 12-year-old boys who were in his fifth grade class at pingry. he received a suspended sentence and five years of probation. in 1990, he pleaded guilty to second degree sodomy and first degree sexual abuse for incidents involving a 12-year-old boy and a 10-year-old boy. he was sent to prison until 1995.

photo

after the school announced it was launching an investigation, 21 of his pingry victims banded together to make their claims on the school. represented by the same lawyers, they agreed to give depositions and then sit for mediation with pingry in an effort to avoid a lawsuit.

during his deposition, in a hyatt hotel conference room in downtown charlotte, n.c., mr. dackermans lawyers say one topic seemed to be of particular interest to pingry: therapy he had received after he and his family were displaced from new orleans by hurricane katrina in 2005. mr. dackerman said the abuse wasnt the focus of his therapy, he was there to talk about his marriage and being out of work. but it did come up. that, his lawyers say, opens him to questions about when he discovered the damage left by his abuse.

rice fuller was also abused at pingry, beginning when he was in fifth grade in 1976, in a pattern he described as so pervasive and so frequent, that when it was happening, it happened everywhere. mr. alton abused him in his car, during boy scout trips, at summer camp, and in mr. altons office at pingry, behind a heavy wooden door.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

i can still hear that door shutting, mr. fuller said. there were times when people knocked on the door and we would be in there, and he would tell them to go away.

mr. fuller is a clinical psychologist, and during graduate school, while working at a psychiatric facility, he decided to see a therapist. sexual abuse was not the reason he sought therapy, he said, but he discussed it. mr. fuller said there was some benefit to getting counseling when he did, but now he feels hes being punished for it.

advertisement continue reading the main story

theyre going to pick off the people who have a statute of limitations problem, rather than saying were committed to doing everything we can to support the people who went through these atrocities  and they used that word in one of their letters, atrocities, mr. fuller said.

for each victim, pingrys lawyers could spend up to two hours taking their deposition, and 95 percent of their time was spent on the statute of limitation issue, said stephen crew, one of the lawyers representing the pingry victims. if they found somebody who had been to therapy, theyd dig and dig and dig and probe and probe, and it was abundantly clear, crystal clear, that thats what they were looking for.

photo

at the mediation in september, 19 survivors flew in, at their own expense, from all over the country and gathered around a long wooden conference table in a manhattan office. one by one, they recounted their stories, in graphic detail, in a room crowded with lawyers, pingry board members and insurers. displayed next to the victims were pictures of themselves at the ages they were when the abuse occurred, all big smiles and uneven little boy haircuts, oversized adult teeth still new in their mouths.

mr. crew said that he and his co-counsel, peter b. janci, believe all their clients have at least a fighting chance on the statute of limitations. but in mediation, he said: it became clear that the insurance company was not going to offer much of anything on some cases, and pingry was not going to make up the difference. thats where it fell apart.

ive got a set of brothers where one is in and one is out, he said of pingrys interpretation of the statute. ive got plaintiffs who were in the same tent, at the same time, on the same night, with the same perpetrator  one is in, and some are out.

in a statement, nathaniel conard, the headmaster of pingry, said that the school, remained committed to the ongoing mediation process.

he said that the school recognized the difficulty of the mediation process for survivors. we remain hopeful we can reach a resolution that helps the survivors heal and move forward, he said, while also keeping our school stable and healthy for the students it serves today, and the students it will continue to serve into the future.

marcy m. mcmann, a lawyer for mr. alton, declined to comment.

the pingry survivors say they are negotiating as a block, and they refuse to leave any member of their group with nothing.

were just entries on a balance sheet, mr. humphrey said. youve reduced my life to a line item on an insurance claim like a roof or a damaged car. if im the only guy who gets a settlement, ill figure out how to split it between 21 men.