within a year or two of elimination of the mandate, the individual insurance market will resemble the failed pre-obamacare days when pre-existing conditions and high premiums made access impossible. the difference is that the government will foot a large part of the cost through subsidies. before the a.c.a., lower-income people who didnt qualify for medicaid were priced out of the individual market, but with subsidies, they can now purchase lower-cost plans. if the individual mandate is eliminated, it will be middle-income people without subsidies who lose access.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the continuing high enrollment this fall supports the idea that most people still see the subsidized insurance offerings on the exchanges as a good deal. as a result, the demand side of this unusual market will stay strong for the subsidized customers.

how will the insurance companies react? they will see high demand for subsidized insurance as a tempting market in spite of past and future chaos. the problem for them is that these customers are sicker and less predictable in their needs, which makes it difficult to set a price. this is precisely why the number of insurers this year has dropped so severely. but managing uncertainty is at the core of this business. any risk is acceptable if the compensation is high enough.

many observers have been critical that only one or two obamacare insurers offer plans in many counties. but for the remaining insurers, there is a silver lining: monopoly. without serious competition and with the support of subsidies, insurers can set premiums high enough to cover any contingency and virtually guarantee a good profit. the high quoted premiums on the exchanges signal that insurers are anticipating these changes in the pool. the remaining insurers will not run away. in fact, i expect those who stay will report record profits next year, even without the mandate. by now all those firms with a low tolerance for risk have exited.

however, the timing of a mandate repeal is central. eliminating the individual mandate will make little difference to insurers in 2018 if the mandate expires in 2019. but congress may decide to eliminate the individual mandate immediately. then insurers, who priced their plans assuming continuation of the same historical enrollee pool, will lose their shirts as healthier enrollees drop out. changing the rules halfway through the game is not something insurance company c.e.o.s. can anticipate, but it is their biggest challenge now.

a surprising result of eliminating the individual mandate would be an effective expansion of a plan that many republicans in congress would like to cut or abolish: medicaid. under the evolving obamacare policies, lower-income enrollees are heavily subsidized by the government, and the plans on the exchanges are largely offered by insurers specialized in medicaid service to the states.

without the individual mandate, the exchanges will not die but will continue as zombies offering high-cost coverage, fed by the federal government and stumbling around the health system failing to serve their original purpose  access for all regardless of age, health status or pre-existing conditions.

yet as long as the subsidies continue, health plans will offer their policies on the exchanges with very high premiums. while this may allow access for some who otherwise would be left out, the grand purpose of the a.c.a.  to allow affordable care for all  will slip away. is this any way to do health policy?