advertisement continue reading the main story

rosehaven (sundancenow) this australian fishes-out-of-water comedy, created by its stars, celia pacquola and luke mcgregor, is about neurotic big-city best friends who find themselves running a family real-estate business in a small town in tasmania. affable and human, its the mirror-world version of terrible-twosome shows like youre the worst or catastrophe.

call my agent! (netflix) a show-business comedy about a boutique talent agency in paris that seems to represent every french actor youve ever heard of, call my agent! is polished to a high shine and features the best as-themselves cameos  by a roster that includes nathalie baye, isabelle adjani and juliette binoche  since the larry sanders show.

norsemen (netflix) a deadpan spoof of bloody, bawdy historical-ish dramas like vikings and game of thrones, the norwegian norsemen puts contemporary words and ideas in the mouths and brains of 8th-century marauders to hilarious effect. (a chieftain returning from a raid beats a newly captured slave, then sadly reflects on the limits of fear-based leadership.) theres some monty python here and a lot of the office, with kare conradi marvelous in the role of the viking villages pusillanimous michael scott.

line of duty (hulu) hulu had a banner year for british shows with harlots and national treasure, but the fourth season of this perennial procedural favorite makes the list for thandie newtons tightly wound performance as a detective suspected of cooking evidence. the plot takes some typically wild turns but ms. newton is believable in the most unlikely circumstances.

stranger (netflix) full disclosure: this is an affirmative-action slot, recognizing the ubiquity and popularity of south korean dramas. the murder mystery stranger has less of the usual awkwardness and obviousness (yes, i know, cultural differences) and it has two other big advantages over most k-dramas: its only eight episodes long and it stars the immensely likable bae doo-na as a fearless cop.

the 10 best shows that ended in 2017

cue up the boyz ii men: its hard to say goodbye. among the rich bounties of 2017s tv offerings came some tough finales  some abrupt and unwelcome, some thoughtful and intentional.

advertisement continue reading the main story

to qualify for this list, shows had to air an episode during the 2017 calendar year. this list does not include shows designed as one-season mini-series. finally, this list considers the shows entire existence, not just its swan song.  margaret lyons

photo

1. the leftovers (hbo) on the leftovers, the weight of grief was so enormous it could bend truth. thats how things wrapped up  as if things wrap up  for the endlessly evocative, almost too-beautiful series, with a finale that was truer than true. the tragic, captivating nora (carrie coons) went to australia, convinced a machine there could send her to the other side, the side where the 2 percent of the population that vanished in the departure now live. the side where her husband and children would be.

and maybe it worked, and maybe it didnt, but what she did find  decades later, from half a world away  was her other husband, kevin (justin theroux), handsome and compassionate. what do you do when nothing in the world makes sense the way it used to? the best you can, same as before.

2. please like me (hulu) this australian coming-of-age comedy blends its sweet disposition with its unsentimental view of the world, creating room for both darling goofballs and catastrophic depression. many ensemble comedies are aspirational (friends, say) and the ones that arent tend to be cynical (its always sunny in philadelphia). please like me is neither of those things. instead, its thoughtful and welcoming, often hilarious and just oddball enough.

photo

3. american crime (abc) abc was never going to be the right home for this bleak, substantive drama anthology, so the fact that it ran three seasons is some kind of blessing. regina king won two emmys for her performances on the show, and she should have won a third for this final season, where she played a devoted but weary social worker.

photo

4. halt and catch fire (amc) a so-so first season gave way to a gorgeous second, an aggressive third and this satisfying, confident fourth installment. the show followed the early days of personal computers, and despite occasional struggles to make forgone conclusions feel like real points of drama  are people really going to want to use the internet?  it always found deeper and more human stories beyond the clickety-clackety keyboards. the series blossomed narratively in season 2, but it wasnt until season 4 that the show became its fully actualized self.

what halt and catch fire understood better than most other shows is how people get stuck with one another. its not always out of adoration or compatibility. sometimes the most potent kind of love is mutual passion.

5. girls (hbo) a lightning-rod show from before it even premiered, girls died as it lived: surrounded by angry blog posts but also telling some stories in an extraordinarily deft fashion. the final-season episode american bitch, a two-hander for guest-star matthew rhys and the shows star and creator, lena dunham, was a late-in-the-game stunner, probing the cultural confusion around lecherous, literary men.

photo

6. downward dog (abc) one might have guessed that a talking-dog show would not be long for this world, but one probably would not have guessed that the talking dog would sound like an anxious podcaster and be a wistful philosopher. downward dog only aired eight episodes, but that was enough to solidify its place in the one-and-done hall of fame. the shows specialty was its tender approach to ordinariness, its baked-in knowledge that what makes a dog special  or an owner special, or a friend special  is that theyre yours.

advertisement continue reading the main story

7. orphan black (bbc america) clones, glorious clones. orphan black was the rare sci-fi thriller with an emotional core, thanks in large part to its star, tatiana maslany. her fascinating, specific performances as several different characters breathed life and vitality into what can sometimes be a genre where construction matters more than execution. while the shows intricate plotting could drift to the arcane, particularly in later seasons, the series never gave up its central humanity  or its occasional, welcome moments of humor.

8. underground (wgn) this historical drama about slavery and the underground railroad was frequently devastating and disturbing  and sometimes sudsy and juicy. but the standout episode by far was this seasons minty, essentially a full-episode monologue performed by aisha hinds as harriet tubman. other shows are not trying formats like this, and the untimely cancellation of underground means were unlikely to see anything like it again any time soon.

9. playing house (usa) after an almost two-year hiatus, playing house returned for a third season in 2017  a season that lasted a mere four weeks. thanks for nothing, usa. the comedy, created by and starring jessica st. clair and lennon parham, was gentle and goofy, and the season 2 episode officer of the year is arguably the best romantic comedy of the last several years.

10. (tie) sweet/vicious and switched at birth (mtv and freeform) these shows are at opposite sides of the teen-tv spectrum: sweet/vicious was slick and snarky and barely eked out 10 episodes, while switched at birth could be painfully earnest and enjoyed a 104-episode run. but both were centrally attached to the idea of female companionship, and both told stories about young women being their own most capable advocates  particularly in the wake of assault, abuse or discrimination.