everyone knows that new yorks nightlife was so much cooler back in the day. they just dont agree on when that day was. maybe the glory nights of danceteria and the latin quarter in the 1980s, or the shimmering 70s heyday of studio 54. maybe back to the punk explosion at cbgb, or further to andy warhols court at maxs kansas city  all the way back past the savoy ballroom of the harlem renaissance to pfaffs beer cellar on broadway near bleecker street, first outpost of american bohemia, where walt whitman probably sidled up to some rugged bowery bhoy and said, things were much livelier last week, too bad you missed it.

catherine mcgann, who photographed new york nightlife from 1986 to 2001, never shook the feeling that the good times had ended just before she arrived. like club 57, she said, referring to the small but influential club that is the subject of club 57: film, performance, and art in the east village, 19781983, a new exhibition chronicling the art scene there between 1978 and 1983, at the museum of modern art.

photo

i photographed a lot of those people from that world, like warhol or keith haring, ms. mcgann said. but it wasnt before 83, so i guess it doesnt count.

oh, but it does.

as the photographer for michael mustos weekly nightlife column in the village voice, ms. mcgann captured a transition in new york club life as the 1980s gave way to the 1990s, and a new generation of nocturnal creatures showed its plumage.

after warhol died, everything changed, ms. mcgann said. who was running the party? thats when the club kids stepped in and began to dominate. the 80s was more underground and grungy. the 90s was the equivalent of the great gatsby. it was money and decadence and endless nightclubs, velvet ropes and drink tickets, a lot of self-promotion, look at me, look at me, take my picture.

that era crashed with the 1996 murder and dismemberment of a club kid named andre melendez by michael alig and robert riggs, two other regulars. that was the end, ms. mcgann said. that summed it all up.

ms. mcgann no longer lives in new york, forced out by real estate prices. that, too, speaks volumes about how the citys nightlife has changed.

follow @nytimesphoto on twitter. catherine mcgann is on instagram. you can also find lens on facebook and instagram.