when i met him, santiago sat alone on the second floor of a crowded family restaurant in central san salvador, sipping a bowl of soup. he wore jeans, work boots and a polo shirt that hid his tattoos. to passers-by, he looked like any other workingman enjoying his lunch.

tell me about terrorism, santiago said. hed heard that i once worked in afghanistan. how do you define it? el salvadors supreme court had declared the gangs to be terrorist groups, a move that seemed designed at least in part to draw aid from the united states. for more than an hour, while santiago smoked cigarettes and drank beer mixed with lemon juice, we talked about terrorism in afghanistan, iraq, syria and palestine. santiago granted that the gangs of el salvador were violent, but theirs was a violence of a different nature. the only parallel i see is that we represent a certain community, a segment of society that has been marginalized, he said. but our violence is not ideological and certainly not religious.

i asked him how the gangs represented anyone other than themselves. what services did they provide to the communities? the taliban governed those under their control with laws that, while brutal, were often more consistently enforced than the governments. the gangs, by comparison, were predators, killing shopkeepers for failing to pay bribes and battling rival gangs over issues of territory and respect that had nothing to do with the needs of the community.

santiago nodded. the question isnt what services we provide, he said. the question is more fundamental: what does our existence say about the government and the services it fails to provide? we exist because there is nothing else.

like the f.m.l.n., the gangs of el salvador were shaped by the long civil war that began in 1980. back then, the f.m.l.n. was a constellation of leftist groups facing off against the right-wing government. as the battles became increasingly violent, hundreds of thousands of salvadorans relocated to the united states, settling largely in los angeles, where their children organized to protect themselves from other poor minorities trapped on the outskirts of the american dream. by the time they were deported, years later, they had formed the very gangs gnawing at salvadoran society  gangs that were notably brutal, known for severing the heads of enemies and utterly disregarding the fate of civilians caught in the crossfire. now, as they had during the civil war, hundreds of thousands of refugees were fleeing, including more than 50,000 children under 18 who in recent years have attempted the 1,500-mile overland journey to the united states.

the original anti-gang mano dura was first employed by the nationalist republican alliance, known as arena, the right-wing party that first won the presidency in 1989. that ultimately served only to strengthen the resolve and coherence of the gangs. when the f.m.l.n. took power in 2009, it tried something different. it began working in secret to broker a truce between the nations warring gangs. the premise was simple: through trusted intermediaries, bring top leaders together in minimum-security prisons, allow them to interact and encourage them to forge a peace on the streets.

when this original truce finally fell into place in 2012, it almost immediately cut the national homicide rate roughly in half. but as it became public, questions surfaced: were the gangs merely consolidating their positions before they unleashed another wave of violence? were the leaders being given special treatment that included access to drugs and prostitutes? was the government investing in a strategy in which the gangs could negotiate by killing more people? once exposed, the truce never enjoyed much popularity among salvadorans, and the united states fiercely opposed it. in 2014, the government began backing away from the effort, and the homicide rate began to climb significantly once again.

advertisement continue reading the main story

when snchez cern became president in june 2014, he cut off all government support for the effort and within seven months had sent the gang leadership back to maximum-security prisons, severing their lines of communication. one of the most peaceful periods since the civil war led to one of the most deadly, and not just because intragang warfare was on the rise. police violence radically escalated, too, with authorities killing eight times as many suspected gang members in 2015 as they did in 2013. in a remarkable feat of reporting, journalists for the salvadoran newspaper el faro found that between january and august 2016, for every police officer that died in a gunfight, 53 suspected gang members were killed. in the history of modern war, combatants are far more likely to be injured than killed. but in el salvador, during 1,074 firefights with alleged gang members in a 20-month period, the police killed 693 and injured only 255. the countrys vice president has publicly granted officers the right to use deadly force without any fear of suffering consequences.

what is happening is like a war in nearly every way, but the vocabulary of war has no words to describe this new variation. the gangs look something like an insurgency, but they appear to have no political aim other than to avoid being killed. the mere existence of would-be diplomats like santiago reflects a new dynamic, once unthinkable, and at least a potential willingness in some corners to lay down arms. in december 2016, leaders of ms-13 told el faro that they would be willing to sit down with the government, even placing the dismantling of the gang on the table if it achieved peace. where before that option was out of the question, the leaders appear to have evolved in the wake of the truce. in february, they created the gang coordination group for dialogue. the group even reached out this year to a united nations special envoy, asking him to initiate a dialogue between the gangs and the government.

the f.m.l.n. has so far failed to respond to these overtures, and so have many salvadorans. a recent poll showed that 40 percent of salvadoran adults approve of torture to combat the gangs, while nearly 35 percent endorse extrajudicial killings. the politicians are unpopular, but so are the gangs. in the neighborhood of montreal de mejicanos, a violent hilltop slum under the administration of ms-13, one resident told me that in her area, finca argentina, the gangs had killed a boy who refused to join, buried him in an anonymous grave and forbade his parents to retrieve the body. in aguilares, i attended the funeral of a bus driver killed because his bosses refused to pay two different gangs for the same route. his brother told me the pain and anger were enough to make him want to join their rivals, but he would let the government kill them instead.

a gang in el salvador makes in a year what a mexican cartel might make in a week. ms-13, the nations largest gang, with 40,000 members, takes in about $30 million annually, collecting extortion payments of a few dollars, sometimes in coins, and distributing it in small handouts to its members who also live off whatever food they can strong-arm from local vendors. they seem uninterested in ideology. what power they have derives from their station as the only organized group present in el salvadors slums; the only family for salvadors tens of thousands of abandoned boys; and, for many, the only economy that exists.

ultimately, santiago said, the gangs would have to wait out the violence until the next round of elections. by santiagos estimate, the gangs could easily deliver 10 percent of the vote, a decisive portion in a two-party system. in march 2018, the nation will hold elections for municipal leaders and legislators, many in areas under gang control. the gangs could use their power to demand that arena ease the mano dura if the party was elected, an act of retribution against the f.m.l.n. for taking such a hard-line against them. the government will have to pay the bill for what theyve done, he said. they will have to answer to us, in one way or another.

santiago seldom stayed anywhere more than a day at a time. sometimes he would spend a night or two at the home of his ex-girlfriend, with whom he has a daughter, now 7. he also has a 5-year-old son with another woman. on rare occasions, he stayed with his grandmother. other times, when he felt there was more heat, he stayed in rented houses that appeared, at least from the outside, to be abandoned.

his obsession with security was warranted: marvin, his counterpart from ms-13, had been picked up in the middle of the night in his home. so had nalo, the political commissioner for the 18th street revolutionaries. when we arrived at one of the empty houses one evening, santiago pulled up in a driveway overgrown with weeds and idled for a minute, observing the scene. the house was dark: a single-story structure with curtains drawn against grated windows. across the street, someone had installed a public-address system and hung a sign to transform a similar home into a church. the voices of evangelicals praising god drifted across the otherwise silent street. satisfied that no one was outside, santiago unchained the garage, threw open its rusted doors and drove inside.

the house looked only slightly better on the inside. the matted fabric of the living-room furniture was covered in cigarette burns. spider webs filled the hallways. santiago turned the water off the last time he left, and the toilets would not flush. he decided to wait for the service across the street to end before going outside to switch it back on. i prefer if people dont see me here, he said.

photo

someone had mounted a new flat-screen tv to the cinder block wall. santiago dropped onto the sofa and turned on the local news. he liked to keep track of political developments elsewhere in latin america, he said.

advertisement continue reading the main story

as he flipped through channels, his cellphone rang. he answered, then listened quietly for a moment. do you want to file a complaint? he asked finally. i or someone else from the team can take you to the human rights office tomorrow, to fill out the paperwork. he listened again, said he understood and hung up with a sigh.

it was the wife of one of the leaders, he said. her husband had been imprisoned for years, and she hadnt been allowed to talk to him in the months since the extraordinary measures went into effect. she said the police still harassed her, stopping by her home, breaking furniture, stealing valuables. she had thought about filing a complaint, but there were rumors that the prisons might begin allowing family visits again. if she filed a complaint, the police might not let her see her husband. in the end, she decided to drop it altogether.

santiago liked his work, but it was growing harder. most of his friends were dead or in jail, he said. a few made it to the united states and lived quiet lives with wives and kids. he sometimes thought he should follow them, but he feared discovery by american authorities. im the last of my group that remains, he said. whatever happens, it wont be good.

santiago joined the 18th street gang in 1998, at 15. his father, who had been a police officer, had left his family behind, making his way to the united states when santiago was too young to remember, and santiago as a young man had little ambition beyond, perhaps, moving his own life in a different direction. during the early years as an 18th street member, he spent his days working in an upholstery shop while finishing his high-school degree at night. he supported his mother with money from odd jobs, but wanted something more. he liked being part of a community, he said, but otherwise it had no purpose, it was just for the sake of it, just to be living the thug life.

slowly, the gangs began to formalize, issuing codes of conduct that prohibited attacks on fellow members and the use of hard drugs like crack. santiago himself was a part of this evolution. just before he graduated from high school, a founder of the 18th street gang, carlos mojica, known as el viejo lin, invited him to a meal. lin had turned his sights on developing 18th street into something that more closely resembled organized crime. santiago went to the meeting straight from school and was still wearing his uniform when they sat down. lin smiled. continue studying as much as you can, santiago recalls him saying. people like us need to find an interest, something to occupy our minds. he gave santiago a reading list that included the salvadoran constitution and the bible. he told me that i should go to church, santiago recalled. i thought he was crazy, but then he told me: im not saying you should become a christian, but trust me, you wont find peace anywhere else.  santiago took his advice seriously, memorizing passages from the bible and beginning to organize evangelical events. his was an odd gospel, one that combined christian principles like unity and love with an acceptance of the violence and crime by which the gangs defined themselves.

that all changed in 2006, when santiago was charged with attempted murder following a shootout with ms-13, even though he claims he played no part in it. after the government dropped the charges for lack of evidence, santiago says, he decided that it was time to put an end to the criminal chapter of his life. he asked the leadership if he could focus his energies on finding channels for peace. they agreed.

santiago never shared with me how, or what, he was paid for his work, but it couldnt have been much. his daughter was supported by remittances from her mothers relatives in the united states. the only lucrative stream of income they could have tapped, from the cartels that passed through their territory, was off-limits. i asked santiago why the gangs, with all their manpower, never tried to tax the cartels. he laughed. no way, man, he said. with the government war on them, the gangs could hardly afford a fight with the cartels. i have read a little about hitler, santiago said. he was caught out because he opened too many fronts.

advertisement continue reading the main story

santiago is a fast and energetic talker, and when he gets going  bouncing from chinas communist government to colombias peace process to russia under putin  he engages his arms and torso like a conductor, as if summoning his own best ideas. he once told me that in another life, he would have studied law, a profession more suited to his intellectual curiosity. but he also told me that he didnt regret joining a gang, only that he hadnt started his reform efforts sooner. gang structures are cellular, and on a neighborhood level, they often operate independently of the broader leadership. santiago knew most everyone, and he spent his days on the phone with his rivals and sometimes met them in person. they shared details of the latest death by the hand of a rival or the police. they discussed coming meetings with church or nongovernmental leaders. they planned joint communiqus and kept open the lines of communication to avoid any setbacks in the cease-fire.

he pondered whether he would have joined the gang if he had grown up under different circumstances. while many gang members blame the government for breaking the first truce, for santiago the failure was simpler than that. the truce improved the lives of gang members, who were dying in fewer numbers, and of the government, which could take credit for the lower homicide stats. but average salvadorans didnt see much improvement in their lives. extortion continued, as did the murder of innocents. santiago said that continuing to demand money from civilians had been the central mistake of the truce; why it had been destined to fail.

photo

its really sad to reach this conclusion, he told me earlier. we understood this maybe 24 months after the truce began, but it was too late. we shouldve started there.

i asked santiago if he would ever allow his son to join a gang. my son is the most outgoing kid youll ever meet, he said, allowing himself a smile. he shakes your hand, asks your name and wants to tell you all about his school. if he wanted to join a gang, it would be more than 10 years from now. by that time, i hope this dynamic of violence will have changed; if not, no one will want anything to do with it.

more than 22,000 police officers are responsible for security in el salvador, and they are now working alongside about 14,000 soldiers. rather than the armed forces becoming more like a domestic police force, though, the police have become more like military occupiers. early one evening, i accompanied the police on a patrol through soyapango, a dense municipality of 300,000 consisting of low-slung homes and corrugated shacks to the east of the capital. it is considered one of the most dangerous places in the country. as we drove down a narrow avenue packed with pedestrians, we passed a man carrying a woman, unconscious, across the street, his face fixed in panic. he neither stopped the police to ask for help, nor did they offer any.

the captain and a driver picked up three young officers from the sidewalk of the central square: well-groomed, well-built 27-year-old graduates of the same class at the police academy. we eased out of the dense streets of central soyapango toward a neighborhood called horizontes, in the thick of ms-13 territory. even in the generally dilapidated state of san salvador, there was a noticeable increase in the general disrepair. the streets were crushed into rubble, empty lots were overgrown and abandoned, most of the houses were made of cinder block, without so much as a coat of paint or plaster. trash filled the open spaces like wild grass.

the plan, such as it was, involved searching a nearby destroyer house, slang for a hide-out, this one in horizontes, where they believed some ms-13 members might be seeking refuge after a firefight with the police. in reality, the mission was simpler than that: a presence patrol, to show they could come and go as they wished in enemy territory, a reminder to the gangs, or anyone who helped them, that the government would not sit idle. one officer told me that he and his fellow officers had killed five gang members in a firefight two weeks earlier, in the exact spot where we walked. he pointed to a sewage pipe emerging from a storm drain. one of them died there, he said, adjusting his assault rifle. the survivors had run, he said, but the police had come to believe that the gang members were hiding in the destroyer house.

stripped of paint, its windows sealed with boards, the home looked abandoned. an officer nicknamed chino, because his fellow officers thought his light skin and almond eyes made him look chinese, banged on the door. when no one responded, he knocked out the front window board. to our surprise, a young man wearing only boxers stepped into the living room, his hands raised. chino leapt through the window cavity and took aim at him. get down, he yelled. what are you doing here?

advertisement continue reading the main story

the young man dropped to his knees. i live here, he replied, looking up slightly.

thats a lie, the cop responded. youre hiding out.

a foam mattress with a soiled, twisted sheet lay in the center of the room. a badly torn sofa, its coils exposed through faded velvet, was pressed against a wall. chino asked the man how long hed been in the gang. im not involved in anything, he replied. i sell tomatoes in the central market. i live with my girlfriend here. shes pregnant with our second kid.

chino told him to lie flat and then placed the tip of his boot beneath the young mans chin and lightly lifted his face, now looking him directly in the eye. i dont believe your wife lives here, he said. like this.

another officer came in from the backyard; he was clutching a police belt with the holster attached. did you take this from a police officer? chino demanded, tossing the belt on the mattress pad.

the boy began to plead. no way, you guys would kill me, he said, shaking his head. imagine me doing something like that, with two kids. the cops stepped outside to call in the apparent theft of the belt. from the other end, they received orders to leave the boy alone. because he was 17 and thus underage, he was not worth the trouble.

past the house, we came upon a shooting range used by the gangs. a few crude human silhouettes were spray-painted on a cinder-block wall, with crooked circles drawn over their hearts. the concrete was pocked with bullet holes. on an adjoining wall, someone had scrawled the words ver, or y callar, a gang refrain across el salvador: see, hear and be silent.

we walked to valle de las delicias, a neighborhood a few blocks over. giant blue-and-black murals covered the backs of buildings, memorials to fallen leaders that, despite the surrounding decay, were remarkably well maintained. as we snaked through an alley, we came upon another young man, slender with curly hair and acne scars covering his face, who was talking to someone on a candy-bar-style cellphone that hailed from the 1990s. an officer snatched the phone away, tossed it to a colleague and began to frisk the man roughly.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

i didnt do anything, he said, resisting the manhandling. the boys parents raced onto their porch.

he didnt do anything, why are you harassing him? the father, who was smaller than his son and wore a yellowed tank top, demanded. the officer pressed down on the boys neck until he was nearly bent over. he asked his colleagues for a camera to register him. hes got no record of any crimes, why are you placing him in the system? the father asked.

advertisement continue reading the main story

shut up or ill register you next, the officer snapped.

the cops left the family seething on their porch. look at how they abuse him, just because he is young, the father told me. i dont understand how they can live with themselves. they have kids, too. how would they like it if someone did this to their kids?

at the end of the patrol, we walked to the edge of the neighborhood, marked by a giant ceiba tree that soared some 150 feet above a parking lot at the edge of a fallow field. the officer who had registered the boy asked me what the family had said to me. i told him. he paused to reflect.

in these marginalized communities, every family has at least one person involved with the gangs, he said. of course im sad about this. im sad about the poverty, i feel sorry for these families, those involved in the gangs, but especially the innocents who die. a police truck idled beneath the trees broad canopy. the officers got in, one by one.

all of this is about poverty and marginalization, he said, nodding at a trash bin near the trees sprawling roots, where the words [expletive] police were written in english.

santiago was often lonely in his work. gang life revolved around crime, not peace, so he remained on the fringe. until last year, his community included an informal group of a few high-ranking religious leaders, diplomats and the gang commission. they met to discuss strategies to reinitiate the truce or at the very least to keep open the lines of communication.

photo

with the pressure brought by the extraordinary measures, the meetings had all but ceased. santiago still tried to communicate with the members of the group, and occasionally, he would visit one. and so, on a saturday afternoon in october, he drove to the lutheran church offices to catch up with the bishop, medardo gmez.

may i help you, sir? the receptionist asked, eyeing santiago as he loitered in front of her desk.

im here to see the bishop, santiago said with a broad smile.

hes in the middle of a meeting right now, she said, staring at her computer.

advertisement continue reading the main story

santiago took a seat and waited. it was nearly noon, and a small crowd sat outside the bishops office. most were dressed in formal attire. santiago wore a collared shirt, jeans and a pair of nike running shoes that a friend had given him. after a few minutes, an older woman with a pressed suit and fine jewelry walked into the lobby. she stopped when she saw santiago in the waiting room.

oh, my god, its you, she said, racing toward him and giving him a hug. does he know youre here? she asked, nodding toward the bishops door. we havent seen you in months, she continued excitedly. how are things? we heard about alex, she said, referring to a member of the political committee from the 18th street revolutionaries who had been arrested. this situation is just horrible right now. youre the first person ive seen in months.

she ushered him to the bishops door and presented him. the bishop, an elderly man with rheumy eyes, sat at the head of a modest conference table, hosting a small gathering. the crowd dissipated when santiago entered, and the bishop stood to greet him. its good to see you here, i wasnt sure if you had been grabbed, too, he said, placing his mottled hand on top of santiagos. i told alex he needed to make routine changes. but they caught him at home, at dawn.

thank god they didnt do anything else to him, santiago said.

like santiago, alex was a part of the political committee from the beginning, ever since the truce was first announced. now he was locked up for murder, the bishop said.

ive been told that there are testimonies saying it wasnt him, the bishop continued, staring at the table as if talking to no one in particular, maybe they will prove it. he turned to face santiago, who was looking at the vast collection of photos on the bishops desk and walls. it seems that you are the only survivor.

marvin, santiagos counterpart within ms-13, was in prison and suspected to be cooperating with the authorities under a plea agreement. nalo, a top leader of the 18th street revolutionaries, whose real name is carlos eduardo burgos nuila, was too. alex, meanwhile, was imprisoned but, so far as anyone knew, had signed no such deal. though the gangs had moved swiftly to replace them and resume communications with the rest of the committee, the bonds were new and untested.

santiago asked the bishop how things had been going with the other members of the informal group  the diplomats, nongovernmental workers and church leaders. the receptionist entered with the bishops lunch, a watery bowl of stew. the bishop looked down at it with disappointment.

photo

the bishop said he was planning a forum to bring together local leaders and government officials to talk about the extraordinary measures, specifically the impact the violence was having in neighborhoods. he lifted the bowl to his lips and drank, then picked at a tough-looking piece of short rib before giving up. we must insist on dialogue and push forward at all levels, he said. we dont have to see it only as a dialogue with gangs, but we want to integrate, boost dialogue, with everyone.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the bishop held a faint hope that by bringing residents of the affected areas out to speak with officials, they would hear stories about the misery their policy had wrought. the measures have made matters worse instead of being helpful, he said. the idea of a forum is to say, both nationally and internationally, look, the extraordinary measures here are not working.  he paused and sighed. we cant deny the death toll has decreased, he continued. but the way the police are behaving now, they have stopped being agents of safety. now they are agents of death.

santiago grew animated. to hear a respected church leader echo his feelings had brought him to something like catharsis. these days, he said, the police staged fake gunfights just to kill gang members, then explained it away by calling them terrorists. do i look like a terrorist? he asked the bishop.

the bishop shook his head and pushed his chair back from the table. there were heavy bags under his eyes, and he was running late for a meeting in another part of town. he looked at santiago. no, its clear to me that they have just said this to justify repression and request international assistance, he said.

santiago saw the bishop off, then lit a cigarette in the buildings courtyard, beside a dormant fountain overrun with foliage. these chats give me strength; they tell me that im not alone, he said, flicking his ash into an empty bucket. that at least someone thinks like i do.

last summer, things began to unravel for santiago. the government campaign against the gangs continued, and the truce  though still in effect  was fraying, its future in question. in august, prosecutors took 18 non-gang members involved in creating the original 2012 truce, mostly low-level functionaries and government officials, to trial on charges of criminal conspiracy and smuggling banned goods into prisons.

santiago watched the trial on television. marvin and nalo, two of his gang counterparts, had in fact turned states witnesses after their incarceration. nalo was the star witness during the trial. he testified that gang members were given fried-chicken dinners and flat-screen tvs for their willingness to reduce the homicide rate but also described the cash dealings they had with both major political parties ahead of the 2014 presidential election, which included more than $250,000 in payments for their support. still, no politicians were charged or even asked to testify, neither were the intellectual authors of the truce, including the current defense minister. eventually, all the defendants were acquitted and the judge called out the prosecutors for charging individuals who were merely acting on government orders. unbowed by their defeat in court, the government quickly appealed the judges ruling and brought a new round of charges, this time accusing individuals involved in the 2012 truce of extortion. but it hardly mattered. the governments mano dura had broken the gangs political commission apart. though the truce still held among the gangs, it was as much about self-preservation in the face of government aggression as it was about creating peace.

though santiago felt sorry for his former compatriots, he mostly felt devastated that years of work  building alliances and trust in civil society, forging relationships with rivals, selling the vision on the streets  had been turned into a public spectacle. but he had his own problems to worry about. by the end of august, even before the defendants were found not guilty, he was already preparing to flee the country.

santiago knew there would be no reprieve, at least not until the 2018 elections. well before the trial, santiago wrote a manifesto for the gangs. for the first time in decades, they would not support the f.m.l.n. at the polls. they would instead use their political might to swing the elections away from them, whether to the right-wing party or, potentially, third-party candidates. the quid pro quo had always been support  in return for money  for the f.m.l.n. but president snchez cern of the f.m.l.n. had broken its longstanding relationship with the gangs by waging war against them. so the gangs would respond by wielding their 10 percent of the vote to punish them in the legislature. the approaches from political parties had already started: politicians seeking access, favors, votes ahead of next years election. we are the pretty girl that everyone wants to dance with right now, santiago told me.

advertisement continue reading the main story

but they would do so without santiago. the authorities had found him. this february, months before the trial started, he was pulled over for a routine traffic stop after another meeting with bishop gmez. the police ran his car and identification, then let him go. but santiago was suspicious. he sent his car to a specialist who found a gps tracking device stuck to the chassis. santiago switched vehicles.

in april, shortly after easter, the police stopped him again. this time they charged him with resisting arrest and placed him in detention. after four days, two prosecutors and a police investigator came with an offer. the truce trial was a few months away and santiago could testify against his former compatriots or he could go to jail for the rest of his life, on possible charges of gun trafficking, electoral fraud and smuggling contraband into jails. after making the offer, the authorities were forced to let him go  they had no grounds to hold him.

but he knew they would arrest him again, and he would be faced with the same dilemma. he didnt want to snitch and undermine what he genuinely believed was the only way out of the cycle of violence consuming el salvador. it would be turning his back on everything hed worked for and all those he had tried to convince. at the same time, with the prisons teeming with disease and overpopulation, he couldnt imagine being consigned to a shared cell for the rest of his life. he was only 34. he decided to flee.

when we last spoke, he would not tell me where he was, only that he had no plans to return to el salvador, at least not for the next year or so. he was no longer the optimist of even six months earlier. the f.m.l.n. would lose the presidential election in 2019. and his people, the gangs and their community, would ensure they had a tough time in next years legislative and municipal elections. but in the meantime, he could do nothing to further the cause of dialogue. for now, that effort was broken.

right now, im a bit more of a realist, he said. i could argue that no matter which party wins, they are not going to look for an alternative. the civil war took years and tens of thousands of deaths to push both sides to negotiate. so, too, would this war. wars only end when someone wins or when both sides grow tired of the killing. the violence has to reach a much higher level than where it is now to force that reckoning, he said. only then will people start thinking about an integrated solution. the truth is, the country has to bleed more.