the law says that presidents should limit designations to the the smallest area compatible with proper care and management. in both cases, utah politicians have argued that the actions of the previous presidents abused the law by exceeding that limit and were illegal.

environmentalists and some native nations say mr. trumps decision will destroy the national heritage and threaten some 100,000 sites of archaeological importance in the monuments desert landscapes.

conservative lawmakers and many westerners argue that the move is the proper response to decades of federal overreach that have sometimes starved communities of revenue and autonomy. when mr. clinton formed grand staircase, the move halted plans for a coal mining project there that would have brought desperately needed jobs to a poor county.

mr. trumps move is viewed as a victory for republican lawmakers, fossil fuel companies and others. the federal government controls about two-thirds of the land in utah, and the states leading politicians have long pushed for more local control.

hes been sympathetic to the fact that weve been mistreated, senator mike lee of utah said of the president, and im grateful that he is willing to correct it.

the announcement sparked an immediate outcry from mr. trumps opponents. whats next, president trump, the grand canyon? said rhea suh, president of the natural resources defense council.

video

in april, mr. trump ordered the secretary of the interior, ryan zinke, to review 27 national monuments created since 1996, a process he said would end another egregious use of government power. in august, mr. zinke delivered a report to the president suggesting that mr. trump change the boundaries of six of those monuments.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the struggle over public lands has been fought most fiercely in the west, and mr. trumps decision was anxiously anticipated for months. on monday morning, hundreds of people gathered outside the state capitol, some in cowboy hats, to protest mr. trumps announcement.

helaman thor hale and andrea hale, both native americans, brought their three sons to the rally. its a historical trauma our people have been through over and over, mr. hale said of mr. trumps move.

farther south, at the edge of the monument, another group gathered to applaud mr. trumps decision standing beneath a banner: thank you for listening to local voices.

the navajo nation, along with other tribes and conservation and outdoor industry groups, has vowed to challenge the decision to reduce both monuments in court, and several lawsuits are expected.

we will stand and fight all the way, said russell begaye, president of the navajo nation, adding that the united states government had already taken millions of acres of my peoples land.

at least one lawsuit was filed late monday  by the wilderness society, great old broads for wilderness and eight other groups  in defense of grand staircase.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

national monuments are lands that are protected from development by law. they are roughly analogous to national parks, but while national parks are created by congress, national monuments are created by presidents through the antiquities act. republicans and democrats alike have used the law to protect millions of acres of public land, and its supporters say it is a bedrock of the american conservation legacy.

each monument has its own specific restrictions. at bears ears, for example, federal rules forbid new mining and drilling, but allow the interior department to continue to issue cattle grazing leases.

mr. trump is not the first president to shrink a monument. woodrow wilson reduced mount olympus by half. franklin roosevelt cut the grand canyon monument at the behest of ranchers. (both are now national parks.)

advertisement continue reading the main story

but the courts have never ruled on whether a president actually has the power to make these changes. the coming legal battle will probably have far-reaching implications.

50 miles colorado canyonlands national park 15 san juan county utah blanding bears ears national monument ute mountain ute reservation bluff san juan river vermilion cliffs navajo nation grand canyon new mexico colorado river hopi reservation albuquerque 40 40 flagstaff zuni reservation holbrook arizona little colorado river 25 17 utah 50 miles canyonlands national park san juan county bears ears nat. monument colorado ute mountain ute colorado river navajo nation hopi 40 flagstaff zuni 17 arizona new mexico

if mr. trumps legal challengers win in court, the decision could affirm future presidents rights to use the antiquities act to extend protection to large areas of public land, and cement the monuments current boundaries.

but if they lose, mr. trump and future presidents could drastically shrink any of the dozens of monuments created by their predecessors, opening the formerly protected terrain for all kinds of development.

one-hundred and twenty-one scholars recently signed a letter arguing that only congress can legally shrink a monument. todd gaziano of the pacific legal foundation and john yoo of the university of california, berkeleys law school, have argued in opposition, saying that the power to create a monument implicitly also includes the power of reversal.

president obama created bears ears national monument in december 2016, after years of lobbying by five tribes in the region: the navajo, the hopi, the ute mountain ute, the ute indian tribe of the uintah and ouray reservation, and the zuni. it is named for a pair of towering buttes  the bears ears  that dominate much of the landscape.

mr. obama set the boundaries to include 1.35 million acres, a size his supporters said was needed to protect some 100,000 objects of archaeological significance, including grave sites, ceremonial grounds, ancient cliff dwellings, as well as their surrounding ecosystem.

mr. trumps proclamation shrinks bears ears to just over 200,000 acres, and it reflects a more narrow view of the antiquities act. he confines monument protection to two separated land masses that include the most celebrated features  places like the bears ears, the moon, doll house ruins, mule canyon and comb ridge, which is home to ancient granaries, kivas and a wall-sized mural called the butler wash kachina panel.

in a proclamation explaining his decision, mr. trump said that some of the places in the original monument are not unique to the monument or are not of significant scientific or historic interest. others, he notes, are already protected in other ways.

advertisement continue reading the main story

for example, the proclamation says, plant and animal species such as the bighorn sheep, the kachina daisy, the utah night lizard, and the eucosma navojoensis moth are protected by the endangered species act and existing land-use plans.

grand staircase-escalantes new boundaries include one million acres in three zones, one of them separated from the other two.

in september, a version of mr. zinkes report recommended changing the boundaries of six of the 27 monuments under review.

but he also recommended the creation of three new monuments. one was at camp nelson, ky., a post where black soldiers trained during the civil war. another was the mississippi home of the civil rights hero medgar evers.

the third was in an area called the badger-two medicine, in mr. zinkes home state of montana.