photo

sunday puzzle  jeff chen returns with a puzzle that puts things inside of other things, as opposed to monty pythons royal society for putting things on top of other things.

todays theme

i normally love mr. chens puzzles and he is a godsend to beginning puzzle makers who are learning the art of construction, but i have to say that this one confused me. i get the theme, but i believe that solvers will have to take the theme clues absolutely literally in order to solve it. i made this a lot harder on myself by expecting the answers to the clues to read like a new phrase, and they do not. as always, your mileage will vary.

if you solve cryptic crosswords, you are used to seeing indicator words in the clues. words like about or around can indicate to solvers that they need to look for a word that is wrapped around another word, or that another word is inside. keep that in mind as you solve. at 22a, for example, the clue lists about a port on the black sea has as its answer royal tasters, and the letters for yalta are either shaded or circled. the word about in this clue means that the lists are literally about, or wrapped around a port on the black sea.

dont see it? lets zoom in a little closer:

royal tasters: yalta is the black sea port

now lets see whats about yalta:

royal tasters: rosters is whats about yalta, and a roster is a list. lists about a post on the black sea.

got that?

lets try another one. at 92a, fear among underground workers solves as mindreaders. that doesnt really make sense, so lets dice this up:

mindreaders: dread is among or inside underground workers.

mindreaders: those underground workers are miners.

those worked well for me, but not all of the theme entries hung together, in my opinion. well, thats not entirely true; they work under the strictest interpretation, but some of the phrases and clues mr. chen used seemed a bit random to me. flourishes around monsoon events, for example, is an odd but lexical phrase. the answer, brain surgeons, would be absolutely mystifying if you hadnt gotten some of the easier theme entries first. burgeons means flourishes, but it probably wouldnt be my first guess, and it goes around rains, or monsoon events.

advertisement continue reading the main story

like i said, stick to the literal interpretation of what the indicator words are asking you to do, and youll do fine.

tricky clues

3d: fun wordplay! ivan pavlov, of course, was best known for his classical conditioning experiments on dogs where he rang a bell and fed them to see if they would still salivate when the bell was rung without a food reward.