new york  october 9, 2017  fox news channel (fnc) has signed kiron skinner, phd, as a contributor, the network announced today. in this role, she will offer both foreign policy and political analysis across fnc and fox business networks (fbn) daytime and primetime programming.

in addition to her role with fnc and fbn, skinner directs several entities at carnegie mellon university, including the center for international relations and politics, the institute for politics and strategy, the institute for strategic analysis, and the washington semester program. skinner is the taube professor of international relations and political science. she is also the w. glenn campbell research fellow at stanford universitys hoover institution.

prior to joining fnc, she regularly provided commentary on national and international television and radio programs. her opinion essays have appeared in the new york times, the wall street journal, the washington post, among other major publications. skinner has written extensively in international relations and politics and her coauthored books reagan, in his own hand (2001) and reagan, a life in letters (2003) landed on the new york times best sellers list, as well as received additional awards.

throughout her career, skinner has served on several boards for the federal government, focusing on foreign and defense policy. she has been a foreign policy adviser or surrogate for the presidential campaigns of newt gingrich, rand paul, mitt romney, and donald trump. she was also a member of the executive committee of the trump transition team.

skinner holds ma and phd degrees in political science and international relations from harvard university, and undergraduate degrees from spelman college and sacramento city college. she also received an honorary doctor of laws degree from molloy college, long island.

fox news channel (fnc) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. the number one network in cable, fnc has been the most-watched television news channel for more than 15 years and according to a suffolk university/usa today poll, is the most-trusted television news source in the country. owned by 21st century fox, fnc is available in 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

fox news media contact:

jaclyn giuliano 212.301.3436