by the new york post editorial board



once again, a supposed big break in the drive to destroy president trump over collusion with the russians during the 2016 campaign stands exposed as nothing more than bad reporting. plus, the professionalism of the fbi looks compromised by anti-trump bias.

the media went berserk friday on news that former trump confidante mike flynn had copped a plea deal with special counsel bob mueller. all the usual suspects launched an orgy of speculation on what beans flynn must have spilled.

it all went into overdrive when abcs brian ross reported that flynn had been instructed to reach out to moscow during the campaign: this seemed to be the long-awaited proof of collusion with vladimir putin against hillary clinton.

except that ross retracted the claim hours later: the reach-out was only after election day, when any president-elect is expected to start connecting with other world leaders, us-friendly or not.

abc has now suspended ross for four weeks without pay  modest punishment for an error that probably had a lot to do with the stock markets dive early friday.

meanwhile, news broke of another supposedly neutral dirt-digger in hot water for having a political agenda: mueller, it turns out, kicked a top fbi agent off his team for apparent anti-trump bias.

the justice departments inspector general this summer launched a probe of alleged trump-bashing texts by peter strzok, one of the top fbi counterintelligence investigators. that obliged mueller, already under fire for hiring several pro-hillary lawyers for his team, to oust strzok from his russian-meddling investigation.

remarkably, the agent had also been a key player in the probe into clintons mishandling of classified information via her secret use of that unsecure private server for all her government work. hes now in deep freeze with a job at fbi human resources.

so a weekend that began with signs of armageddon for trump closed with the president looking as secure as ever, the anti-trump media looking worse than ever  and the fbis nonpartisan investigations looking anything but.