mcdonalds would be wise to open up a location inside the oval office.

an upcoming book by corey lewandowski and david n. bossie  president trump's former campaign manager and former deputy campaign manager, respectively  is claiming that trump enjoyed indulging in mcdonalds big macs and filet-o-fish sandwiches, along with other assorted junk foods and snacks, according to the washington post.

trump reportedly orders coca-cola at the push of a button

on trump force one there were four major food groups: mcdonalds, kentucky fried chicken, pizza and diet coke, wrote lewandowski and bossie in a passage from let trump be trump, a retrospective about their time on the campaign. the authors add that air force one was well stocked with sealed packages of potato chips and oreo cookies, seeing as trump would only eat from a fresh, unopened package of snacks.

the book further claims that trumps preferred mcdonalds order on the campaign trail was two big macs, two filet-o-fish and a chocolate malted  a meal that exceeds 2,400 calories, assuming the malted refers to a small mcdonalds chocolate shake.

trump was also very particular about his fast food, with the authors alleging that the orchestrating and timing of mr. trumps meals was as important as any other aspect of his march to the presidency. whats more, lewandowski claims that trump once ditched staffer sam nunberg at a mcdonalds because his off-menu order was taking too long for his liking.

leave him, the author remembers trump saying. lets go.

trump served 360-year-old soy sauce at south korean state dinner

trumps love of fast food hasnt exactly been a well-kept secret. in may 2016, trump celebrated winning the republican nomination with a big mac and fries, and in august 2016 he shared a photo of himself enjoying kfc aboard his private jet. politico reported that an aide also made frequent runs to a mcdonalds in nyc for egg mcmuffins at breakfast time  and two quarter pounders with fries at lunch  during the campaign.

celebrating 1237! #trump2016 a post shared by president donald j. trump (@realdonaldtrump) on may 26, 2016 at 2:29pm pdt

before he entered office, trump himself told anderson cooper that he prefers fast food over other types of restaurants, mostly for cleanliness reasons.

im a very clean person. i like cleanliness, and i think youre better off going there than maybe someplace that you have no idea where the foods coming from. its a certain standard, he said in a 2016 interview. i think the foods good, he added.



lewandowski and bossies let trump be trump also reveals how they witnessed communications director hope hicks, then a campaign spokeswoman, press his suits with a steamer while trump was still wearing them, and also how trumps top aides would feel his wrath  i.e., expletive-laden screaming sessions  when things werent going his way.

itd break most hardened men and women into little pieces, they write.

follow us on facebook for more fox food & drink news

let trump be trump is scheduled for release on dec. 5.