the nfl, beleaguered by player protests during playing of the national anthem that have angered many fans and lowered tv ratings for its games, has doubled down on liberal politics.

as youve probably heard by now, the league proposed last week to join players in donating nearly $100 million to what espn called causes important to african-american communities.

but in reality, the proposal is nothing more than a political stunt designed to score brownie points with the mainstream media  from espn and sports illustrated, to the new york times.

the nfl wants to partner with the players coalition, which represents players protesting social injustices and racism, along with a pair of liberal nonprofits  the united negro college fund (uncf) and dream corps.

according to espn: the nfl hopes this effort will effectively end the peaceful-yet-controversial movement that former san francisco 49ers quarterback colin kaepernick started when he refused to stand for the national anthem last season.

dont be fooled. the nfls donation isnt about social causes or racial equality. its about americas favorite football league caving to left-wing activists.

both the uncf and dream corps, which have been critical of president trump, would each receive $25 million under the nfl proposal. the players coalition would get the rest of the money to make charitable contributions to other organizations.

as soon as the news broke, espn praised the donation to social justice organizations in the enduring push for racial equality. sports illustrated claimed the plan would address social justice issues that will help in african-american communities. the new york times seized on the proposal, saying it will aid social causes.

dont be fooled. the nfls donation isnt about social causes or racial equality. its about americas favorite football league caving to left-wing activists.

just follow the money, which would ironically come from the nfl owners who many liberals have vilified as racist for denying kaepernick a job he doesnt deserve. kaepernick has not been hired by another team this season, after leaving the 49ers.

the uncf has criticized president trumps education budget in recent months. the dream corps is a nonprofit advocacy group founded by cnn commentator van jones, who called president trumps election victory a whitelash.

dream corps is essentially a promotional vehicle for jones, featuring his new book and other racially charged political commentary. one of the groups top issues is an inclusive green economy to lift people out of poverty  because theres nothing low-income americans need more, of course, than stricter environmental regulations.



moreover, dream corps sponsored the anti-trump we rise tour and provides catchy posters for its ongoing anti-fascist war. one reads: real men rep the f-word #feminist. another proclaims: no ban. no wall. sanctuary for all.



you get the picture. instead of bringing americans together around a national pastime, the nfl is standing with multimillionaire anthem kneelers and funding the anti-trump resistance movement. some way to market to president trumps 63 million supporters!



the nfl would be better off appeasing its loyal fans than liberal activists. all three of the leagues thanksgiving games saw double-digit drops in viewership from the previous year. meanwhile, nfl merchandise sales have fallen by 20 percent in recent years. people are changing the channel and their shopping habits.



the same goes for espn, which has inundated americans with pro-kaepernick and anti-trump coverage for months. the network recently laid off 150 more employees, bringing the total number of 2017 layoffs to 250 workers.



memo to the sports industry: stick to sports  or face extinction.

