imagine getting paid $40,000 to spend three months globetrotting to some of the worlds most beautiful and exotic locations, staying in the very best luxury accommodation with all of your expenses and travel covered. sounds pretty good, right? for sorelle amore, 28, this quite literally was a dream come true.

beating 17,000 other applicants competing for thirdhome's "best job on the planet," amore, from ballina in new south wales, australia, was paid to document her travels and stay in 12 extravagant homes for 12 weeks in places like scotland, morocco, the bahamas, costa rica and china before finishing up in australia.

a post shared by s o r e l l e a m o r e (@sorelleamore) on sep 1, 2017 at 4:28am pdt

earlier this year, amore wrote that her goal was to travel to 12 destinations and get paid for it, so she was shocked when her brother found the competition ad for the best job on the planet.

it matched so perfectly to my goals, i was sure it was going to be me. i made sure i was truly vulnerable and honest in my video entries, pouring my heart into every single one. [thirdhome] told me later that they liked how real i was. i was a goofball, but i guess normal people could relate. i think thats what stood out  just me being me.

kicking off in july staying in a castle in scotland, amore was soon setting up shop in mansions, posh townhouses, villas and sprawling homes complete with infinity-edge swimming pools and stunning oceanfront views from marrakesh to george town.

her three favorite locations were the warm waters of the bahamas, where she swam with turtles and sharks; a stay in a 12-bedroom, five-story mansion with eight staff in the costa rican rainforest; and the warm hospitality she experienced in china, where she stayed close to the great wall.

i still dont believe its real. im going to sit down soon and read through my diary as so much happened in such a short amount of time. i just experienced what some people will never experience in their lifetime and i did it in three months. it was very intense but its for sure going to go down as one of the greatest times of my life.

a post shared by s o r e l l e a m o r e (@sorelleamore) on nov 23, 2017 at 1:24am pst

as glamorous as the life of a travel influencer may seem, though, it has its challenges. having to be picture-perfect all the time and constantly camera-ready can take its toll, not to mention long stints of travel and alone time spent in airports. amore said she just rolled with this, as she knew she had to churn out huge amounts of content week after week. despite being able to take a friend along for the ride, she opted to spend seven out of the 12 weeks flying solo, as she had often done in her previous travels.

there were three days out of the three months that i was like im so sad, but then it went away really quickly because i saw it from the perspective of the people around me, she told news.com.au.

so how did she become an influencer and amass so many fans in the first place?

after moving to iceland from australia two years ago on a whim inspired by a contestant on the bachelorette, amore found herself with a camera in hand and not much to do other than take photos. capturing otherworldly landscapes and producing quirky semi-nude photos of herself in the snow, amores instagram began to grow, and with it a lot of questions from her followers about iceland as a travel destination.

a post shared by s o r e l l e a m o r e (@sorelleamore) on oct 18, 2017 at 4:34am pdt

in an effort to answer their questions, she began to put together short tourism videos on youtube. before she knew it, shed gained 100,000 subscribers, which no doubt played a part in helping her land the best job on the planet gig.

now with the world as her oyster, amore plans to keep on doing what she does best  getting paid to travel and sharing tips with those wanting to follow in her footsteps.

i plan on doing what im doing and actually teaching people how to be a travel influencer because i discovered this is a really great way to live. why would you not want to have a job like this?

this article originally appeared on news.com.au