new york  december 4, 2017  fox news channel (fnc) has named contributor gillian turner a full-time news correspondent, announced jay wallace, president of news. based in fncs washington, dc bureau, turner will cover the top news stories of the day across daytime and primetime programming.

in making the announcement, wallace said, gillians experience in working across both television and politics has given her an extensive understanding of the news cycle. we are confident she will make a great addition to our news division, covering essential stories in the field.

turner added, i am delighted to be joining fncs news division full-time. the three years ive spent as a contributor with the network, analyzing and commenting on u.s. foreign policy and national security, have been among the greatest of my professional career. i look forward to connecting with the fox news audience in this new role.

turner joined fnc as a contributor in 2014 and has appeared on a variety of programs, including fox news sunday, americas newsroom, outnumbered, mediabuzz, tucker carlson tonight, fox & friends and the five. during her time as a contributor, she served as a columnist for the hill and was vice president with jones group international, a global strategy firm, where she worked directly with former national security adviser jim jones.

previously, turner worked at the white house national security council during the presidential administrations of george w. bush and barack obama. under the obama administration, she served as the acting director for legislative affairs at the national security council and liaised between the white house and the u.s. house of representatives on foreign policy and national security issues. during the bush administration, turner served as a research assistant in the office of the national security adviser and was one of the youngest recipients to receive the national security council outstanding service award.

turner holds a masters degree in african security studies from the university of cape town, south africa and earned her b.a. in comparative politics, cum laude, from columbia university. there she was granted the sharp fellowship for excellence in american politics award and the vidda foundation award for academic excellence. additionally, turner is the recipient of the national security council seal medal and the state department appreciation award.

fox news channel (fnc) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. the number one network in cable, fnc has been the most watched television news channel for more than 15 years and according to a suffolk university/usa today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. owned by 21st century fox, fnc is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

fox news media contact:

jaclyn giuliano/212.301.3436 or jaclyn.giuliano@foxnews.com