

by l. brent bozell iii, fox news



so the top broadcast news journalist who raked the former top cable news journalist over sexual harassment has now been fired for sexual harassment. you cant make this stuff up. matt lauers canned. as i write these words there is only a report from variety that describes his alleged indiscretions, but one thing is for certain: nbc would not have fired their top star were this not an impeachable offense.

theyre dropping like bowling pins all over hollywood, in sports, in politics and in journalism. every day someone new is guilty of sexual harassment. while the deed is being reported, what is being swept under the rug is the raging hypocrisy.

there is no better example of the cynical mind at work than evidenced by these questions from lauer to bill oreilly during their today show interview on september 19.

he wanted oreilly to know what a lout he was: [oreillys accusers] came forward and filed complaints against the biggest star at the network they worked at. think of how intimidating that must have been, how nerve-racking that must have been! doesnt that tell you how strongly they felt about the way they were treated by you?

he wanted to know if oreilly was truly repentant: over the last six months since your firing, have you done some soul searching? have you done some self-reflection? and have you looked at the way you treated women that you think now or think about differently now than you did at the time?

and then there was the topper: you were probably the last guy in the world that they wanted to fire because you were the guy that the ratings and the revenues were built on, you carried that network on your shoulders for a lot of years. so doesnt it seem safe to assume that the people at fox news were given a piece of information or given some evidence that simply made it impossible for you to stay on at fox news?

how could matt lauer make these solemn pronouncements on national television with a straight face?

in a way hes no different from al franken, or harvey weinstein, or charlie rose, or bill clinton, or garrison keillor or all those other liberals who publicly champion the rights of women at every opportunity while looking for every opportunity privately to torment them. it is as if they believe they are on ethical high ground.