harris faulkner to anchor new program at 1pm/et

dana perino named as host of new 2pm/et show

sandra smith joins bill hemmer as co-anchor of americas newsroom

new york september 26, 2017  fox news channel (fnc) will unveil a new daytime lineup on monday, october 2nd, announced jay wallace, president of news. harris faulkner will anchor her own 1pm/et signature news hour entitled outnumbered overtime with harris faulkner and dana perino will host a 2pm/et program with news and analysis on the days top stories, known as the daily briefing with dana perino. additionally, sandra smith will permanently join bill hemmer in co-anchoring americas newsroom (9-11am/et).

in making the announcement, wallace said, harris, dana and sandra are rising stars and their combined background and expertise across news, business and politics will enable us to provide a more in-depth look at the major stories breaking out of washington, and around the country. we are living in unprecedented times and this new lineup ensures our viewers will get the best news, information and analysis on the news of the hour across the nation and around the globe.

faulkner and smith will remain on outnumbered (12-1pm/et) alongside rotating panelists. jon scott will continue to helm happening now (11am-12pm/et) and shepard smith reporting and your world with neil cavuto will occupy the same 3pm and 4pm/et time periods respectively, while perino will continue as co-host of the five.

capitalizing on the strength of outnumbered, faulkner will anchor an additional hour of news with outnumbered overtime with harris faulkner (1-2 pm/et). each day, faulkner will continue the conversation on the top news stories by utilizing the resources of fnc journalists in the field, plus one-on-one interviews with newsmakers and roundtable discussions with the networks top contributors. outnumbered overtime originally debuted as a web show led by faulkner following the tv version every day and her new program will seek to harness the popularity of that effort.

faulkner added, three years ago, we enhanced cable news with a show that combines news and opinion, predominantly from the female point of view, and immediately, outnumbered became the number one show in its timeslot. i am proud of the work were continuing to do there, and blessed to have this added opportunity to create a new program that will help inform our viewers and keep them engaged in a conversation surrounding the days headlines.

smith commented, theres no one better in the business than bill hemmer and i am honored to kick off the networks news hours with him, informing our viewers of the biggest stories and issues driving the day.

following outnumbered overtime, perino will host the daily briefing at 2pm/et, an hour often dominated by breaking news, white house press briefings, and more from washington and around the nation. with her understanding of what makes news, how to respond to it and her unique political expertise, perino will break it all down with insight from key beltway experts.

perino remarked, our new show will aim to take on the major issues facing americans and explore them from all angles. i am excited for this opportunity to draw from my political background to help our viewers get beyond the headlines and better understand what is really going on behind the scenes in washington each day.

new daytime schedule:

9am-11am/et  americas newsroom with bill hemmer and sandra smith

11am-12pm/et  happening now with jon scott & rotating co-anchor

12pm-1pm/et  outnumbered

1pm-2pm/et  outnumbered overtime with harris faulkner

2pm-3pm/et  the daily briefing with dana perino

3pm-4pm/et  shepard smith reporting

4pm-5pm/et  your world with neil cavuto

about the anchors:

harris faulkner joined fnc in 2005 as a correspondent and has served as co-anchor of outnumbered since it launched in 2014. throughout her tenure with the network, faulkner has covered some of the most prominent news stories and frequently appears as a substitute anchor for shepard smith reporting. previously, faulkner served as anchor of the sunday edition of the fox report. full bio: http://www.foxnews.com/person/f/harris-faulkner.html.

dana perino currently serves as co-host of fncs the five (weekdays 9-10pm/et). she joined the network in 2009 as a contributor. perino is also co-host of the podcast, perino & stirewalt: ill tell you what, alongside fncs politics editor chris stirewalt. prior to joining fnc, perino served as white house press secretary for president george w. bush. full bio: http://www.foxnews.com/person/p/dana-perino.html.

sandra smith joined fox business network (fbn) as a reporter in october 2007 and was named as co-anchor of fncs outnumbered when it launched in 2014. in november 2015, smith, alongside fbns trish regan, moderated the networks inaugural republican presidential primary debate, making history as the first dual-female team to host a debate. full bio: http://www.foxnews.com/person/s/sandra-smith.html.

about fox news channel

fox news channel (fnc) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. the number one network in cable, fnc has been the most watched television news channel for more than 15 years and according to a suffolk university/usa today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. owned by 21st century fox, fnc is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

fox news media contact :

jessica jensen/212-301-3531