anastasia reshetova, a former miss russia contestant, probably wasnt expecting anyone to pay attention to her feet in a recent bikini photo, but thats exactly what a few of her less-than-friendly instagram followers decided to focus on.

woman's 'elf on the shelf' makeup shocks instagram

the trolling began after reshetova, the first runner-up in the 2014 miss russia pageant, posted a photo of herself in an orange bikini a few months back. a couple of mean-spirited commenters were quick to criticize reshetovas feet, calling them flippers, and even joking about her shoe-shopping habits, according to the independent.

 , ))) a post shared by reshetova anastasia (@volkonskaya.reshetova) on sep 8, 2017 at 3:00am pdt

on the flip side, several of reshetovas followers defended the statuesque model, describing her feet as beautiful and reasoning that, as a tall model, reshetova would likely have larger than average feet.

reshetova, 21, has reportedly been subjected to similar comments in subsequent photos, although it appears that the haters have not deterred her from showing off her feet, sharing beachy pics, posting a pedicure video, or even boasting about her 180-centimeter (nearly 6-foot) frame.

           @anatomia_beauty_clinic!      -  6000 !   ,        ;)  ,           - !   ,    a post shared by reshetova anastasia (@volkonskaya.reshetova) on nov 20, 2017 at 9:14am pst

hola))) hola - la-la  a post shared by reshetova anastasia (@volkonskaya.reshetova) on sep 13, 2017 at 2:07am pdt

relax at @selfie_beautyclub  a post shared by reshetova anastasia (@volkonskaya.reshetova) on nov 24, 2017 at 8:25am pst

180    a post shared by reshetova anastasia (@volkonskaya.reshetova) on nov 23, 2017 at 2:59am pst

you can have size 41 feet, but do not be proud of it, wrote one commenter, per a translation, about the nov. 23 post above.

infinite feet, wrote another.

like in her previous post, however, reshetova had far more defenders than critics. in fact, one said to her shed gladly take reshetovas figure if it came with size 43 (approximately 11.5 in u.s. size) feet.

follow us on facebook for more fox lifestyle news

the independent notes that reshetova further answered her detractors by posting an underwater photo in which shes literally seen with flippers at the end of her legs.

  !.    ,     )))) a post shared by reshetova anastasia (@volkonskaya.reshetova) on nov 20, 2017 at 2:39am pst

this world is mine, she captioned the photo, along with an emoji of a dolphin.