new york  november 28, 2017 fox news channel (fnc) has promoted advertising sales executives dominick rossi, frank sorace and sam moser, announced marianne gambelli, president of ad sales for fnc and fox business network (fbn). effective immediately, rossi will become senior vice president of eastern sales, sorace will serve as senior vice president of sales planning and operations, and moser will be senior vice president of national sales.

in making the announcement, gambelli said, i am thrilled to add dom, frank and sam to the senior leadership team overseeing ad sales for the multiplatform businesses across fnc and fbn. their innovative insights and strategic partnerships have delivered record revenues for both networks and i am confident their leadership will help maximize our position in the marketplace and enhance our cross-portfolio capabilities.

in his new role, rossi, formerly vice president of eastern sales, will continue to oversee all ad sales out of the new york office for both fnc and fbn. he joined the network in 2007, and most recently helped lead the sales team to a record year in advertising revenue for the 2016 fiscal year.

as senior vice president of sales planning and operations, sorace will oversee all planning and operations for both fnc and fbn. a 21-year veteran of fox news, he has managed the day to day tv sales operation since the network launched in 1996. throughout his tenure at fox, sorace helped establish the fnc sales planning and commercial operations division.

former vice president of national sales, moser will continue to oversee advertising sales across chicago, detroit, dallas and los angeles, while managing the sales teams in each region. he joined the network in 2005 and has played a pivotal role in all of fncs sales efforts.

prior to joining fnc, rossi served as an account executive specializing in news and late night programming for cbs. he started his career as a media buyer, working at advertising agencies j. walter thompson and mindshare. a graduate of fordham university, he holds a bachelors degree in communications.

before helping launch fnc, sorace managed the sales planning and pricing group for nbc owned and operated television stations. he got his start in the industry at abc in 1976, holding various positions in their finance department. he holds an mba in finance and a bachelor of science degree in accounting from st. johns university.

most recently, moser served as the vice president of advertising sales in the southwest and western regions for the game show network (gsn). previously, moser held various advertising sales positions at viacom, including senior vice president of advertising and sales for nickelodeon and tv land, and vice president of sales for vh1. he graduated from the university of texas at dallas.

fox news channel (fnc) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. a top five cable network, fnc has been the most-watched news channel in the country for more than 15 years and according to a suffolk university/usa today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. owned by 21st century fox, fnc is available in 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.



media contact:

caley cronin/212-301-3972