new york  september 25, 2017  fox news channel (fnc) has signed gianno caldwell, the founder of caldwell strategic consulting, as a political analyst, announced suzanne scott, president of programming for the network. in this capacity, he will appear across fnc and fox business networks daytime and primetime programs, providing analysis and commentary on political, financial and cultural issues.

in making the announcement, scott said, giannos insight has been widely valued across our network, prompting healthy discussion and debate on critical issues facing the country. we are delighted to have him officially join the fox news channel, sharing top-notch analysis with our viewers.

caldwell added, i am excited, honored and humbled to bring my political analysis exclusively to the number one cable network in the nation. fox news has felt like family since my first appearance on the network. i am thankful for gods continued favor throughout this journey and i am thankful for the support of my family, colleagues, and friends.

in conjunction to his contributor role with fox news channel, caldwell serves as a special correspondent to extra tv, covering red carpets in hollywood and washington, dc. he is also a contributor for the hill newspaper.

as the founder of caldwell strategic consulting (csc), caldwell has provided strategic advice in the areas of public affairs and government relations, where he has worked with clients at the congressional, federal, state and local levels.

caldwell began his government relations career serving as the director of government relations for naperville township, a local government agency in illinois. in this position, he successfully lobbied the reduction of property tax rates for the whole of naperville township. from there, he went on to serve as a legislative liaison to the illinois state treasurer, which led him to an internship with congressman john shimkus, where he assisted with research and analysis of health, energy, and telecommunications legislation in washington, d.c.

prior to his career in government relations, caldwell worked for the social security administration as a senior legal analyst to the former federal national medicare chief judge. in 2011, he was the director of african american outreach for the dupage county republican party, and served as an advance staffer on mitt romneys 2012 presidential campaign.

caldwell is the recipient of both the 2016 porsche power 30 under 30 and the red alert politics 30 under 30 awards. he is a chicago native and graduated from grand canyon university with a bachelors of science degree in psychology.

fox news channel (fnc) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. the number one network in cable, fnc has been the most watched television news channel for more than 15 years and according to a suffolk university/usa today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. owned by 21st century fox, fnc is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

fox news media contact:

jaclyn giuliano  212.301.3436