

by barnini chakraborty | fox news

exclusive  a republican congressman plans to introduce a bill monday that would threaten huge fines and prison time for elected officials accused of sheltering illegal immigrant criminals from deportation, in the wake of the not-guilty verdict in the kate steinle murder trial.

indiana rep. todd rokitas bill is one of the most aggressive pieces of legislation to date aimed at sanctuary city policies, going beyond the justice departments threat to cut off grants to those jurisdictions.

politicians dont get to pick and choose what laws to comply with, rokita told fox news. americans are dying because politicians sworn to uphold the law refuse to do so.

his stopping lawless actions of politicians (slap) act would hold state and local lawmakers criminally responsible for refusing to comply with federal immigration enforcement efforts. the republicans bill would subject violators to a $1 million fine and up to five years in prison if they are convicted.

its time the federal government gets serious about enforcing immigration laws and holding politicians accountable who conspire to break them, said rokita.

rokita also supported kates law  legislation that would boost penalties for illegal immigrants who were previously deported and that was named after steinle.

on thursday, jose ines garcia zarate, an illegal immigrant who already had been deported back to mexico five times, was acquitted in the 2015 murder of steinle on a san francisco pier.

zarates attorneys argued zarate had found a gun that accidentally discharged, and the bullet ricocheted off the ground before hitting steinle. prosecutors argued zarate intentionally shot 32-year-old steinle.

the killing revived a national debate over sanctuary city policies, as some lawmakers as well as steinles family faulted san francisco for releasing the suspect from a local jail without notifying federal immigration officials.

president trump, who frequently cited steinles case on the campaign trail, called the not-guilty verdict disgraceful and a complete travesty of justice.

attorney general jeff sessions took direct aim at the city, saying san franciscos decision to protect criminal aliens led to the preventable and heartbreaking death of kate steinle.