you've snagged yourself a sinus infection or are battling a bout of strep throat... complete with that daggers-puncturing-your-tonsils feeling. of course, it comes at the worst time ever (because, when doesnt it?) and youre also prepping for your best friends wedding/a holiday party/some fancy get-together where alcohol will be present. youve heard it before: consuming alcohol while taking antibiotics is bad. but one little sip (or 12) really wont be a life-ruiner, right?

not so fast with the champagne there, friend. first, it's important to remember why youre on antibiotics to begin with: you feel awful and, with some help from your prescription, your body is working to fight off a nasty bacterial infection. (antibiotics cannot treat anything viral, like a flu.) basically, antibiotics kill the bacteria that can give you a sore throat, make your ear ache, and spike your temperatures.

and, while drinking alcohol wont reduce how effectively antibiotics make that happen, it can worsen many of the side effectssuch as mild stomach discomfort, diarrhea, nausea, and drowsinessthat are associated with antibiotics, said louise m. dembry, m.d., professor of medicine, infectious diseases, and epidemiology at the yale university school of medicine and school of public health. and it's not exactly ideal if youre out at a function and a slap of exhaustion (or diarrhea!) hits you in the face. meanwhile, alcohol can also slow your body's ability to "bounce back" and restore its energy levels once that infection is no more.

mom of 2 dies days after flu diagnosis

but theres more: consuming antibiotics and alcohol simultaneously can be dangerous for your liver, which typically detoxifies waste products so that your body can get rid of them safely.

some antibiotics can 'stress' the liver, dembry said. that means toxicity to liver cells, which can lead to liver cell death or even impact the livers overall function so it does not work the way it is supposed to."

we know what youre wondering: is it possible that youre on some magic strain of antibiotics where all of this doesnt actually apply? while dembry says that, yes, some antibiotics may be less problematic for drinking than others, you should still lay off the sauvignon.

if youre taking antibiotics, its because you have an infection," she said. "its best to avoid anything that might impact the body's natural ability to heal and overcome the infection, including alcohol."

this article first appeared on women's health.