audio clip: listen to audio clip.

celebrity chefs share their ideas on the tastiest ways to enjoy those thanksgiving leftovers. fox news's lilian huang woo has the details.

take a listen:

croque shorey

serves 1 or 2

a croque monsieur is the classic french grilled ham and cheese sandwich, and the croque madame is a similar sandwich made with chicken rather than ham. this croque is made with shorey's favorite ingredients: sharp white cheddar cheese, roast turkey, spinach, and tomatoes, on hearty multigrain bread. the recipe makes a very large, flavorful sandwich. it consists of seven layers--bread, cheese, turkey, spinach, tomato slices, cheese, and then bread. it can also be served unbaked. the sandwich is very good served with a green salad.

it can be assembled way ahead and then baked for about 15 minutes in a 400-degree oven when ready to serve. it takes that amount of time to soften the tomato, melt the cheese, and brown the bread properly. although the spinach could be added raw, the amount is voluminous (about 2 cups) and would be hard to secure between the bread slices, so i microwave it for 1 minute to wilt it and make it easy to fit into the sandwich.

2 large slices multigrain bread (4 ounces; about 7 by 4 inches)

4 slices sharp white cheddar cheese (about 3 ounces)

about 3 ounces sliced cooked turkey

2 lightly packed cups (2 ounces) baby spinach, microwaved for 1 minute

1 small ripe tomato (about 4 ounces), cut into 4 or 5 slices

1 tablespoon peanut or olive oil

heat the oven to 400 degrees.

lay the bread slices on the counter and cover one of them with 2 slices of the cheese. top with the sliced turkey and then the blanched spinach. cover with the tomato slices, then add the remaining 2 slices cheese and, finally, the second slice of bread.

pour the oil onto an aluminum foil-lined baking sheet and spread it evenly to about the dimensions of the sandwich. press the sandwich into it, then turn the sandwich over so it is oiled on both sides. bake for 15 minutes, until the bread is brown, the tomatoes are soft, the cheese is melted, and the inside of the sandwich is warm. remove from the oven, cut in half, and serve right away.

from: a grandfather's lessons: in the kitchen with shorey to see how it's done, go to www.surlatable.com/jacquespepin.

click here to listen to more fox & food podcasts

follow lilian woo on twitter: @lilianny

chicken jardiniere

serves 4

my mother made this type of stew from the carcass of a raw chicken and its gizzards; i use pancetta instead of gizzards for additional flavor and chicken legs, which stay moist during the cooking. jardiniere means "gardener" in french, and the vegetables change according to what is in season or in my garden. the stew is easy to put together, and it gets better every time you reheat it.

2  ounces lean pancetta, cut into lardons (strips about 1 inch long and inch thick)

1  tablespoons peanut oil

4 chicken legs (about 2 3/4 pounds), left whole or cut into 2 pieces each, ends of the drumsticks and skin removed (about 2 1/4 pounds trimmed)

1  tablespoons all-purpose flour

1 teaspoon salt

1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper

 cup fruity dry white wine

 cup water

12 small red potatoes (about 8 ounces), peeled

8 small baby bella or cremini mushrooms (about 5 ounces), washed

12 small pearl onions (about 4 ounces)

1  cups diced (1-inch) carrots

1  tablespoons coarsely chopped garlic

1 fresh thyme branch

1 cup frozen baby peas

2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley

saute the lardons in the oil in a large saucepan or a dutch oven (the pan should be wide enough to hold the chicken in a single layer) over high heat for 2 minutes. add the chicken pieces and saut them, turning once, for about 8 minutes, until lightly browned. sprinkle with the flour, salt, and pepper and move the chicken around to distribute the flour evenly. cook for 1 minute, then add the wine and water and mix well.

add the potatoes, mushrooms, onions, carrots, garlic, and thyme and mix well. bring to a full boil, making sure that the stew is boiling throughout, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and cook for 45 minutes. (the stew can be prepared ahead to this point and reheated to serve.)

at serving time, add the peas to the stew, bring to a boil, and boil for 2 minutes.

transfer the stew to individual plates or a large platter, sprinkle with the parsley, and serve.

if you haven't had your fill of turkey, you can always go for round 2. a contender from milk street.

recipe: tea-rubbed maple turkey

start to finish: 3 to 3 hours (plus 24 hours to season)

servings: 12

this aromatic, richly seasoned holiday turkey gets much of its flavor from lapsang souchong, a smoked black chinese tea. we added the flavor in two layers. first, we used loose tea to make a flavorful rub for the meat. we then mirrored that flavor by using brewed tea as part of a rich maple glaze. to brew the tea, steep eight tea bags in  cup boiling water; let sit until cooled, then squeeze out all the liquid from the tea bags. you should have  cup brewed tea. if using a frozen turkey, make sure it is completely thawed. and if your turkey has a pop-up thermometer, remove and discard it before rubbing the bird with the tea rub.

don't cover the turkey before it goes into the refrigerator; leaving it uncovered helps dry the skin overnight, which produces crispier skin.

for the turkey and gravy:

6 bags lapsang souchong tea, emptied (9 grams)

1 tablespoon kosher salt

1 teaspoon ground white pepper

12- to 14-pound turkey, neck and giblets discarded

4 cups plus 3 tablespoons water, divided

2 tablespoons cornstarch

for the glaze:

 cup pure maple syrup

 cup strong brewed lapsang souchong tea (see note above)

 cup soy sauce

2 tablespoons unseasoned rice vinegar

 teaspoon ground white pepper

to prepare the turkey, set a roasting rack inside a large roasting pan. using paper towels, pat the turkey dry inside and out. tuck the wings underneath. gently push your hand under the skin over the breasts, thighs and drumsticks to loosen. in a small bowl, combine the tea, salt and white pepper. using your hands, spread half the mixture evenly under the skin. sprinkle the remaining mixture over the skin, rubbing to coat evenly. set the turkey breast side up on the roasting rack and refrigerate, uncovered, for 24 hours.

heat the oven to 325f with a rack in the lowest position. pour 4 cups of the water into the roasting pan. pull the turkey legs up and forward and insert a long skewer through one thigh to the other thigh (see sidebar). roast for 2 hours; the thickest part of the thigh should register 155f to 160f.

while the turkey roasts, prepare the glaze. in a large saucepan over medium, combine the maple syrup, brewed tea and soy sauce. bring to a simmer and cook until large bubbles form, adjusting the heat to prevent boiling over, 8 to 10 minutes; you should have about  cup glaze. reserve  cup; transfer the remaining  cup glaze to a small bowl, stir in the vinegar and white pepper and reserve to serve with the turkey.

remove the turkey from the oven and brush with half of the reserved  cup of glaze. return the turkey to the oven and roast until the thickest part of the breast registers 160f and the thigh registers 175f, brushing with the remaining glaze every 30 minutes, 1 to 1 hours longer. tilt the turkey to let the liquid run out of the cavity into the pan, then transfer to a carving board. let rest for 45 minutes.

to make the gravy, pour the liquid from the roasting pan into a fat separator and let settle for about 5 minutes. pour 2 cups of defatted liquid into a large saucepan over medium-high and bring to a simmer. in a small bowl, stir together the remaining 3 tablespoons water and cornstarch. whisk the mixture into the simmering liquid and cook, stirring constantly, until lightly thickened, about 2 minutes. taste and season with salt and pepper.

carve the turkey and serve with the gravy and the reserved glaze.

cranberry crackle tart makes 6 servings

for the filling

2 tablespoons chunky cherry, raspberry or strawberry jam

2 large egg whites, at room temperature

pinch of fine sea salt

 cup (100 grams) sugar

1 cups (about 150 grams) cranberries (if they're frozen, don't thaw)

confectioners' sugar, for dusting (optional)

butter a 9-inch pie pan (i use a pyrex pan) and place it on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper or a silicone baking mat.

sandwich the dough between two sheets of parchment or wax paper and roll it out until it is a scant 1/8 inch thick. don't worry about making a beautiful circle, because you're going to trim the dough.

fit the dough into the pie pan, allowing the excess to drape over the sides. gently press the dough evenly over the bottom and up the sides of the pan and then, using a paring knife, a pizza wheel or a fluted ravioli wheel, trim the dough to about one third down from the rim of the pan. prick the bottom of the tart shell all over with a fork and freeze for at least 30 minutes. (the leftover dough makes a nice turnover.)

center a rack in the oven and preheat the oven to 400 degrees f.

line the crust with a piece of parchment or a buttered piece of aluminum foil and weight it down with rice, dried beans or light pie weights. bake the crust for 20 minutes, then carefully remove the paper and weights and bake for 8 to 12 minutes more, or until the crust is golden. the crust will have shrunk, but that's fine. set the crust on a rack to cool to room temperature.

when you're ready to fill and bake the tart: preheat the oven to 300 degrees f.

spoon the jam into the crust and spread it evenly over the bottom. working in the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or in a large bowl with a hand mixer, beat the egg whites with the salt at medium speed just until they turn opaque. with the mixer going, add the sugar in a very slow, steady stream, then keep beating until the whites are shiny and form peaks with pretty, droopy tips; they will look like marshmallow.

pour the cranberries into the bowl and, using a flexible spatula, fold them into the meringue. try to distribute the fruit evenly, but don't try too hard-- you want to keep the meringue fluffy. turn the meringue over the jam and spread it to the edges, making it swirly if you'd like. the jam will sneak up around the sides of the meringue, and that's fine.

bake the tart for 1 hour, at which point the top will be light beige and most probably cracked here and there. (if you'd like more color, you can bake it longer or put it under the broiler.) transfer the tart to a cooling rack and cool to room temperature. if you'd like, dust the tart with confectioners' sugar before serving.

serving: just before serving, it's nice to sprinkle the top of the tart with confectioners' sugar. in france, i've seen some meringue tarts served with whipped cream and some with ice cream. i thought that adding whipped or ice cream would be too much--i was wrong.

storing: the tart is best served the day it's made, although it's still pretty nice a day later. leave the tart at room temperature, covering only the cut part with a piece of wax paper or plastic film.

sweet tart dough makes one 9- to 9-inch crust

used by so many french pastry chefs for so many french tarts, this is the dough that i turn to automatically when i've got a tart on my mind. known as pte sable, it's really a sweet cookie dough, the one you'd use to make a tender sabl or shortbread cookie.

i always prebake the crust even if it's going to get another long bake with the filling, because i like the resulting color, flavor and texture--and the fact that the bottom won't be soggy.

i use a fluted tart pan with a removable base. if all you've got is a pie plate, don't let that stop you.

a word on rolling versus pressing: you can roll the crust out and fit it into the tart pan or just press it in. i roll the dough. rolling gives you a thinner crust than pressing, so if you press, you might occasionally find yourself with a little filling left over.

1 cups (204 grams) all-purpose flour

 cup (60 grams) confectioners' sugar

 teaspoon fine sea salt

9 tablespoons (4 ounces;

128 grams) very cold unsalted butter, cut into small pieces

1 large egg yolk

to make the dough: put the flour, confectioners' sugar and salt in a food processor and pulse a couple of times to blend. scatter the pieces of butter over the dry ingredients and pulse until the butter is cut in coarsely--you'll have some pieces the size of oatmeal flakes and some the size of peas. stir the yolk just to break it up and add it a little at a time, pulsing after each addition. when the egg is incorporated, process in long pulses--about 10 seconds each--until the dough, which will look granular soon after the egg is added, forms clumps and curds. just before you reach this clumpy stage, the sound of the machine working the dough will change--heads-up. turn the dough out onto a work surface.

to incorporate the butter more evenly and to catch any dry ingredients that might have escaped mixing, separate small amounts of dough from the pile and use the heel of your hand to smear each piece a few inches across the counter. in french this is called fraisage, and it's the ideal way to finish blending a dough.

to make a rolled-out crust: shape the dough into a disk and put it between two sheets of parchment or wax paper. roll the dough out evenly, turning it over frequently and lifting the paper often so that it doesn't roll into the dough and form creases. aim for a circle that's at least 3 inches larger than the base of your tart pan. the dough will be 1/8 to 1/16 inch thick, but it's the diameter, not the thickness, that counts. slide the rolled-out dough, still between the papers, onto a baking sheet or cutting board and refrigerate for 2 hours or freeze it for 1 hour. (the dough can be refrigerated overnight or frozen for up to 2 months; wrap it airtight to freeze.)

when the dough is thoroughly chilled, put it on the counter and let it rest for about 10 minutes, or until it's just pliable enough to bend without breaking. remove the dough from the paper, fit it into a buttered tart pan and trim the excess dough even with the edges of the pan. (if you'd like, you can fold the excess over and make a thicker wall around the sides of the tart.) prick the crust all over with a fork and freeze for at least 30 minutes, preferably longer, before baking.

to make a press-in crust: butter the tart pan and press the dough evenly over the bottom and up the sides of the pan. you won't need all of the dough if you want to make a thin crust, but i think it's nice to make a thickish one so that you can really enjoy the texture. press the pieces of dough in so that they cling to one another and will knit together when baked, but don't use a lot of force--working lightly will preserve the crust's shortbready texture. prick the crust all over with a fork and freeze for at least 30 minutes, preferably longer, before baking.

when you're ready to bake: center a rack in the oven and preheat the oven to 400 degrees f. butter the shiny side of a piece of aluminum foil (or use nonstick foil) and fit the foil snugly into the crust. if the crust is frozen, you can bake it as is; if not, fill it with dried beans or rice (which you can reuse as weights but won't be able to cook after they've been used this way).

to partially bake the crust: bake for 25 minutes, then carefully remove the foil (and weights). if the crust has puffed, press it down gently with the back of a spoon. transfer the crust to a cooling rack (keep it in its pan).

to fully bake the crust: bake the crust for 25 minutes, then carefully remove the foil (and weights). if the crust has puffed, press it down gently with the back of a spoon. bake the crust for another 7 to 10 minutes, or until it is firm and golden brown. transfer the crust to a cooling rack (keep it in its pan).

storing: well wrapped, the dough can be kept in the refrigerator for up to 5 days or frozen for up to 2 months. while the fully baked crust can be packed airtight and frozen for up to 2 months, i prefer to freeze the crust fitted into the pan but not baked and then to bake it directly from the freezer--it will have a fresher flavor. just add about 5 minutes to the baking time.

bonne ide - sweet tart dough with nuts: reduce the all-purpose flour to 1 cups and add  cup almond or hazelnut flour (or very finely ground pecans or pistachios). proceed as directed on the previous page.

excerpted from baking chez moi,  2014 by dorie greenspan. houghton mifflin harcourt. all rights reserved.