judy gold is a stand-up comic in new york, actress, writer and winner of two emmy awards. she is the host of the podcast "kill me now," available on cbs' play.it and itunes or at judygold.com/podcast. follow her on twitter @jewdygold. the opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

how are you? it must be so exhausting running for president. i hope you're taking good care of yourself.

i happened to be flipping through the channels on thursday night when i saw you talking to donald trump at the republican debate about what you called "new york values." i wasn't sure at first what you meant, but then you explained: "i think most people know exactly what new york values are: socially liberal, pro-gay marriage, pro-abortion, focused on money and the media."

for a moment i actually thought mr. trump was speechless, but duh, he's a new yorker like me, and nobody cherishes the first amendment more than us!

anyway, it's a new day.

and i just took a car service home from my fiance's apartment on the upper east side. i'm pretty sure you're familiar with the ues. it's in manhattan on the opposite side of central park where you had that fundraiser at those two gay guys' apartment in april? i hope that while you were here, you and your wife had time to visit the goldman sachs' headquarters to thank them for that big loan they gave you.

judy gold

i bet you saw the building as your plane was landing; it's one of those huge towers downtown by ground zero. maybe you didn't have enough time, since you never know how the traffic is going to be on the george washington bridge when you're driving in from the airport.

i live on the upper west side and my girlfriend and i are planning to get married as soon as we can find a big enough apartment to comfortably fit all four of us (two kids included). both our apartments are rent stabilized, so we're taking our time finding the right place. if you're not familiar with the rent laws in new york, you should check them out.

n 1997 , our republican mayor, rudolph giuliani, extended rent regulation laws after a big to-do with republican state sen. joseph l. bruno, who wanted them eliminated. thank goodness, our mayor had two important allies: republican state sens. roy goodman of manhattan and frank padavan of queens, who both agreed with the democratic-controlled state assembly.

have you ever been to queens, ted? it's the most racially diverse county in the contiguous united states . my favorite greek restaurant is in astoria. do you like greek food? it's yummy. asghar, my driver, and i were talking about how many great places there are to eat here in nyc. he was born in pakistan, and moved here as a baby. he married a woman from colombia and their two kids are just beautiful, and get this -- they're also tri-lingual! they speak english, urdu and spanish. i must admit that i'm a little jealous about that.

photos: republicans debate in north charleston republican presidential candidates line up on stage before a debate thursday, january 14, in north charleston, south carolina. from left are ohio gov. john kasich, new jersey gov. chris christie, u.s. sen. marco rubio, donald trump, u.s. sen. ted cruz, ben carson and jeb bush. it is the sixth gop debate of this election cycle and the first of 2016. hide caption 1 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston trump, who has been leading gop polls for months, answers a question during the debate. "i'm very angry because our country is being run horribly, and i will gladly accept the mantle of anger," he said. hide caption 2 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston cruz speaks during the debate. the senator from texas opened the event by talking about the u.s. sailors recently detained by iran. "today," he said, "many of us picked up our newspapers, and we were horrified to see the sight of 10 american sailors on their knees, with their hands on their heads. ... i give you my word, if i am elected president, no service man or service woman will be forced to be on their knees, and any nation that captures our fighting men will feel the full force and fury of the united states of america." hide caption 3 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston bush waves to the audience. the former florida governor has been trying to build momentum that he had in the early stages of his candidacy, and he went after democratic candidate hillary clinton early in the debate. "she's under investigation with the fbi right now," he said. "if she gets elected, her first 100 days, instead of setting an agenda, she might be going back and forth between the white house and the courthouse. we need to stop that." hide caption 4 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston rubio delivers an answer during the debate. he frequently attacked president barack obama. "when i become president of the united states, on my first day in office, we are going to repeal every single one of his unconstitutional executive orders," the senator from florida said. "when i'm president of the united states, we are getting rid of obamacare and we are rebuilding our military." hide caption 5 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston carson promised this week he would "insinuate" himself into the conversation when needed. after a discussion between rubio and christie during the debate, carson told moderator neil cavuto, "neil i was mentioned too." cavuto asked, "you were?" carson quipped, "yeah, he said everybody." on a more serious note, carson noted the "divisiveness and the hatred" in today's society. "we have a war on virtually everything -- race wars, gender wars, income wars, religious wars, age wars. every war you can imagine, we have people at each other's throat," he said. "and our strength is actually in our unity." hide caption 6 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston kasich touted his economic record as governor of ohio. "our wages are growing faster than the national average," he said. "we're running surpluses. and we can take that message and that formula to washington to lift every single american to a better life." hide caption 7 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston christie, like most of the candidates on stage, continued to be tough on the current administration. "tuesday night, i watched story time with barack obama," he said of the recent state of the union address. christie also said "you cannot give hillary clinton a third term of barack obama's leadership. i will not do that. if i'm the nominee, she won't get within 10 miles of the white house." hide caption 8 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston from left, republican presidential candidates mike huckabee, carly fiorina and rick santorum arrive for the "undercard" debate that took place a couple of hours before the main event. hide caption 9 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston santorum, a former u.s. senator from pennsylvania, delivers remarks during the debate. "the biggest reason that we're seeing the hollowing out of middle america is the breakdown of the american family," he said. "we have been too politically correct in this country because we don't want to offend anybody to fight for the lives of our children." hide caption 10 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston fiorina makes a point during the undercard debate. "the state of our economy is not strong," she said in her opening comments. "we have record numbers of men out of work. we have record numbers of women living in poverty. we have young people who no longer believe that the american dream applies to them. ... it's time to take our country back." hide caption 11 of 12 photos: republicans debate in north charleston huckabee laughs during the debate, which was hosted by the fox business network. his opening statement was much more serious. "there are a lot of people who are hurting today," said the former arkansas governor. "i wish the president knew more of them. he might make a change in the economy and the way he's managing it." hide caption 12 of 12

hey, i heard that you are a huge fan of "the princess bride." me, too!! did you know that they are talking about bringing it to broadway? that would be so amazing, because william goldman wrote the book right here in nyc!

have you seen any broadway shows recently? i think you would just love "hamilton." lin-manuel miranda wrote it and it's very historical. he's from washington heights and he's so talented. i'm warning you that it's hard to get tickets, but i'm sure you have some "in" somewhere. and check out "kinky boots" and "fun home" if you can. you won't be sorry!

i wish i had more time to write, but i have so much to do. i'm going to probably take a citi bike (a great way to get around manhattan, btw), over to the museum of modern art to get a ticket to the picasso exhibit.

photos: moments from ted cruz's career photos: moments from ted cruz's career u.s. sen. ted cruz, a republican presidential candidate, speaks during a campaign rally at the indiana state fairgrounds on monday, may 2. hide caption 1 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz holds up the hand of carly fiorina at a campaign rally in indianapolis on wednesday, april 27. cruz named fiorina, a former presidential candidate, as his running mate. hide caption 2 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz celebrates his wisconsin primary win with his wife, heidi, and gov. scott walker in milwaukee on tuesday, april 5. walker endorsed cruz for the presidency. hide caption 3 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career with his wife by his side, cruz tours the dane manufacturing facility before speaking to workers in dane, wisconsin, on thursday, march 24. hide caption 4 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz speaks during the cnn republican debate in miami on thursday, march 10. hide caption 5 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz and his wife wave to the crowd at liberty university after he announced his presidential candidacy in lynchburg, virginia, on march 23, 2015. hide caption 6 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz speaks during the 2013 nra annual meeting and exhibits at the george r. brown convention center on may 3, 2013, in houston, texas. hide caption 7 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz poses with his wife, heidi, and his daughters caroline and catherine. hide caption 8 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz (left) fields questions from bruce rastetter at the iowa ag summit on march 7, 2015, in des moines, iowa. the event allows the invited speakers, many of whom are potential 2016 republican presidential hopefuls, to outline their views on agricultural issue. hide caption 9 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career nobel peace laureate elie wiesel (left) listens as cruz (right) speaks during a roundtable discussion on capitol hill march 2, 2015 in washington, d.c. wiesel, cruz and rabbi scmuley boteach (center) participated in a discussion entitled 'the meaning of never again: guarding against a nuclear iran.' hide caption 10 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career governor greg abbott (center) speaks alongside cruz (left), attorney general ken paxton (right) at a joint press conference february 18, 2015, in austin, texas. hide caption 11 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career sen. patrick leahy (right) escorts loretta lynch back from a lunch break as cruz (left) sits nearby during her confirmation hearing before the senate judiciary committee january 28, 2015, on capitol hill. hide caption 12 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz greets supporters at the south carolina tea party coalition convention on january 18, 2015, in myrtle beach, south carolina. a variety of conservative presidential hopefuls spoke at the gathering on the second day of a three-day event. hide caption 13 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz (left) and then-texas governor rick perry stand together during a press conference at the front gate of fort hood about iraq war veteran, ivan lopez, who killed three and wounded 16 before taking his own life on april 4, 2014, in fort hood, texas. hide caption 14 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career (left to right) sen. lindsey graham, sen. john mccain and cruz listen as president barack obama delivers the state of the union address on january 28, 2014, in washington, d.c. hide caption 15 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career then-senate minority leader mitch mcconnell (second right), poses with republican senators-elect jeff flake (left), deb fischer (second left), and cruz (right) at the u.s. capitol on november 13, 2012, in washington, d.c. hide caption 16 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz speaks to reporters on september 25, 2013, after ending his talk-a-thon on the floor of the us senate in washington, d.c. hide caption 17 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz speaks as then-rep. michele bachmann (left), sen. mike lee (second right) and sen. rand paul (right) listen during a news conference may 16, 2013, on capitol hill. hide caption 18 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz listens to testimony during a senate judiciary committee hearing on april 22, 2013, in washington, d.c. hide caption 19 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz holds a news conference to announce the plan to defund obamacare on march 13, 2013. hide caption 20 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career cruz speaks at the cpac on march 6, 2014, in national harbor, maryland. hide caption 21 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career then-senate republican candidate and texas solicitor general cruz speaks at the 'patriots for romney-ryan reception' on august 29, 2012, in tampa, florida. hide caption 22 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career then-senate republican candidate and texas solicitor general cruz speaks during the republican national convention at the tampa bay times forum on august 28, 2012. hide caption 23 of 24 photos: moments from ted cruz's career then-senate republican candidate and texas solicitor general cruz speaks during the republican national convention in 2012. hide caption 24 of 24

and then i'm going to take the subway to my son's basketball game over at his public high school near times square. have you ever taken the subway? it's fast, convenient and safe ( as you know, new york is america's safest big city ), plus i get lots of reading done there.

after the game we'll probably get something to eat since he's always so hungry. sometimes we order in from our favorite neighborhood restaurants, but it's always a struggle which one to pick! vietnamese, korean, peruvian, greek, japanese, italian, middle eastern, indian, deli, pizza -- so much to choose from! thank goodness the new york times has that wonderful food section every wednesday; it gives us so many ideas. it's actually my favorite section after tuesday's science times. do you read the nytimes?

anyway, thanks for taking the time to read this. good luck getting your word out to the american people.

oh, and we actually have a word we use for you here in new york. schmuck. you might hear it if you ever have the chutzpah to step foot in nyc again.