ms. soffer and ms. birkner found the emotional and psychological support resources for people in their early adult life-stage lacking. i went to a family of homicide victims support group run through safe horizons in a church basement in harlem when i was living on the upper west side and there was no one in my generation, said ms. birkner, a brooklyn -based writer and editor. still, it did save my life. ms. soffer said she was the only person under 65 at the grief support groups she joined, adding that among those her own age, i barely know anyone who had lost both their parents.

for a generation known for broadcasting internal monologue across the internet, some of its members seem eager for spaces to express not just the good stuff that litters everyones facebook newsfeed, but also the painful. in november, melissa lafsky wall, 35, the founder of new york-based brick wall media, turned to modern loss after a miscarriage, posting an essay called the silent sorrow. the internet should speak to the parts of life that we all experience, but arent represented in most media, a large one being grief and loss, ms. wall said, adding that the feedback she got was all positive, which she attributes to the site. if you are going to write about your miscarriage on reddit, for instance, its going to be a very different community.

modern loss is a repository of essays, resources and advice that the founders try to edit so that it doesnt sound glib, overly religious or trite. for instance, youll never hear, at least they are in a better place. (our least favorite line ever, ms. soffer said.) the website also examines decidedly 21st century topics like what to do when gmail keeps suggesting someone who has died as a contact, a topic that esther d. kustanowitz, the founder of the blog my urban kvetch, explored in a post called deleting my mother. befitting the target audience, it is not overly earnest. stay tuned for upcoming modern loss events in real life, the sites about us page says. because misery loves company, and nachos. and margaritas.

ms. soffer, a former producer at the colbert report, said of the site, you have to have a sense of humor.

another mourning site speaking to the younger generation is lisa frank mixtape, promising 90s music, 21st century grief. its founder, zoe feldman, 29, solicits essays about human loss (sorry, no pets), sending her contributors a mix tape in return for submitting an essay about a human loss they have experienced. named after the company lisa frank, known for its brightly colored products that ms. feldman said are to her the antithesis of grief, the venture was inspired after her former girlfriend and smith college classmate, rebecca rosenthal, known as becca, died in october 2012 at age 27.

i went to a shaman, a healer and every psychiatrist in manhattan, and the only thing that helped me was talking to people my age who had experienced some devastating loss, said ms. feldman, who works on business strategy for pepsico in new york and has mailed around 50 mixtape cassettes (she will burn a cd for those who dont have a tape player). one person wrote and said its like being part of a weird, sad tribe, she said.

those who are accustomed to social media as a way to tout how fabulous your life is, beware: these sites can be unflinchingly graphic and wrenching. in november, k. h. (submitters use their initials on lisa frank mixtape) wrote, my dad passed away on may 31, 2003 in my arms as i tried to give him cpr .

photo

ms. doughty, the author of a forthcoming book smoke gets in your eyes: and other lessons from the crematory, to be published by w. w. norton in september, said she is seeing a cultural shift happening around what she calls death awareness. her peers are engaging in more-open and public discussions about mortality and loss, a movement of which her ask a mortician channel on youtube is on the frontier.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the series has received over a million views since 2011, fielding questions such as: how do you become a mortician? (go to mortuary school) and can you bake cremated remains into a chocolate cake? (yes, but its kind of gross.) on ms. doughtys blog, contributors discuss issues like, what do dead bodies really look like? and suicide is the cause of death. do you share?

meanwhile, girls, the hbo show about young people making their way in modern-day brooklyn, has twice tackled the issue of grief and death this season, first when hannah horvaths e-book editor, david, is found dead in the hudson river. do you happen to know another publisher that i could maybe slip the manuscript to if i decide that i really want to try to keep it alive? ms. horvath asks her editors widow at his funeral. (she promptly tells hannah, using an expletive, to leave the reception; the protagonist seems to become more sensitive later in the season, when her grandmother dies.)

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the show also highlighted how the internet has made grief more public and casual, and therefore more fraught. why arent you mourning quietly? asks adam, hannahs boyfriend, after she reads him a part of her editors obituary on gawker, which in real life has a tag called and now theyre dead. twitter responses to death, like the hashtag rip, which was widely used after the news of the fashion designer lwren scott s suicide, can also seem more like display than distress.

ms. birkner, a former obituary writer, said: its not the nature of social media, generally, to react thoughtfully to things and think, how can i really help? it would be great if everyone said, can i buy your groceries, or can i start a meal train? 

last february, on what would have been ms. rosenthals 28th birthday, ms. feldman found a long post on her dead friends facebook wall from another friend speculating about how ms. rosenthal had died. a lot of what she wrote wasnt true, ms. feldman said. beccas mother was so upset, and i spent the whole day trying to do crisis management. ms. feldmans explanation for that kind of behavior is performative grief, she said, adding: thats the only excuse i can think of. the nature of the internet allows for that sort of self-indulgent, look at me behavior. on the other hand, ms. birkner said she found support on facebook on long-forgotten death anniversaries.

its such a push-pull around the pros of allowing for a sense of community that the internet builds and the distancing that it allows from having to personally interact with others,  said heather servaty-seib, a professor at purdue in the field of thanatology, the study of death and dying, with an emphasis on adolescent grief.

then theres the lingua franca of social media  the like button  thats totally discordant with death. my god, is there anything creepier than a post announcing someone lost a loved one and seeing 136 people like this underneath? ms. soffer said. facebook floated the idea of a sympathize button, something that came out of its annual hackathon, but has no plans to pursue it, according to the company. (facebook does offer an option to memorialize an account that prevents anyone from logging into it in the future, but allows friends and family, depending on privacy setting, to leave posts on the timeline.)

the fact that the internet is perhaps not the best channel for grief (with gaffes immortalized in cyberspace) is why david fajgenbaum, 28, the founder of national students of amf, a support network for college students with sick or deceased parents, said his organization of 40 chapters on campuses has been cautious about integrating an online component. someone could say the wrong thing online, and could really hurt someone, said mr. fajgenbaum, who started the support group in his mothers memory while an undergraduate at georgetown.

advertisement continue reading the main story

miss manners, a.k.a. judith martin, writes rather unequivocally on the matter. letters of condolence should be written by hand, she said. burdensome as it may be, it offers the comfort of knowing that one is representing the deceased to those who cared about him.

but as mr. fajgenbaum acknowledged, young people are eager for that virtual connection; after all, technology and the internet are a ubiquitous part of their existence. thats what jason feifer, 33, creator of the instantly viral tumblr selfies at funerals, discovered when he posted a few dozen photos of teenagers taking pictures of themselves at funerals. in doing so, mr. feifer, an editor at fast company magazine, said he was documenting a newfangled mourning practice. its important for the older generation to see more than disrespect and to see some kind of genuine communication, he said.

admittedly, though, some of the images made him cringe, in particular the young woman who wrote: love my hair today. hate why im dressed up #funeral.

mr. feifer said, i think there are a lot of kids who saw this tumblr and will not take a selfie at a funeral, but it doesnt mean that the kids who did take these photos dont know how to grieve.