in response, some men are forming all-male text groups at companies or in their industries to brainstorm on harassment issues. some said they planned to be a lot more careful in interacting with women because they felt that the line between friendliness and sexual harassment was too easy to cross. others are struggling to reconcile how these behaviors could happen even among men who believe in equal rights.

joel milton, 30, an entrepreneur in denver with baker technologies, a platform for cannabis dispensaries, said he had recently decided to be more careful about corporate offsites after seeing the swell of #metoo claims.

when i hear someone on my team is having a pool party, now ill say, hey, maybe no managers should be there, mr. milton said, relaying the type of information likely to be covered in many companies employment manuals.

he added that harassment was not something he had thought much about before, but that he was considering his own behavior more. like, did i ever do anything? he said.

many companies have long mandated anti-harassment training to educate men and women about the issue. but in a report last year, the united states equal employment opportunity commission found that much of that training was ineffective and that workplace harassment was widely underreported.

jonathan segal, a lawyer who was on the commissions harassment task force, said he was now fielding odd questions from men about how to behave at work. at a fund-raiser last month in palm beach, fla., some men asked him if it was permissible to hug a woman and where the boundaries should be drawn.

mr. segal said he had explained to the men that the context mattered and that pretending there was a gray zone between collegial friendliness and sexual assault was absurd. for instance, he told them, hugging an old friend is very different from going up behind a co-worker while she was at a desk typing.

photo

if someone cant understand that, then maybe they just shouldnt be hugging, he said.

mr. segal, who runs anti-harassment training, is now expanding part of the program called safe mentoring, which teaches men how to mentor younger women without harassing them. at a recent session, a male supervisor talked about having an extra ticket to a sporting event and feeling he could invite only a male colleague; mr. segal went over how to invite a female colleague without sexually harassing her.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the answer to harassment cannot be avoiding women, he said.

still, some workers said they were starting to follow the pence rule, which was formerly known as the billy graham rule, after the evangelical preacher, but is now named for vice president mike pence. mr. pence has said he does not eat alone with women who are not his wife or attend an event without her if alcohol will be served.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

a conservative writer, sean davis, wrote that a lot of men in media should have effectively been heeding the pence rule all along. he said he had always followed it and that coastal, liberal america was finally waking up to how useful avoiding private meetings with women could be. the former white house adviser sebastian gorka also made this argument.

what were seeing now is men are backing away from the role that we try to encourage them to play, which is actively mentoring and sponsoring women in the workplace, said al harris, who has been running workplace equality programs and writing on the topic from chicago with his partner, andie kramer, for many years. theres apprehension on the part of men that theyre going to be falsely accused of sexual harassment.

not everyone is practicing avoidance. some men said the best route is to ask female co-workers directly if they feel harassed. pat lencioni, the founder of the table group in lafayette, calif., which does executive coaching for companies around issues like diversity, said he was doing just that and had asked the women at his office if they worried about harassment.

i came into the office and said, hey, guys, ive got a question for you: this sexual harassment stuff, all these things, do you guys ever worry its going to happen here? mr. lencioni, 52, recalled. and they were like: no, because we know you. we know who you are.

he said he thought this approach could be adopted more broadly.

other men said they had not talked about workplace harassment with anyone because they already knew what they needed to know. this is a liberal town, said philip rontell, a real estate agent in walnut creek, calif., who added that he supported the #metoo campaign. we all already know this stuff.

when men do want to talk about workplace harassment, some said, they dont know where to go. i just dont know where those conversations are allowed to be had, said ryan ellis, 33, a sales manager for an e-commerce company in santa monica, calif.

austin gilbert, a recruiter in san francisco for the company gametime, said his industry had also had to deal with men talking in online chat rooms at work, which he said could bury and hide toxic comments. his company has closed several high school in-group type of exclusionary work chats over the years, but he worries about more.

advertisement continue reading the main story

we have a policy of telling employees that were free to review all electronic communications, mr. gilbert, 31, said. but thats typically not anyones job responsibility in a small company.

with women empowered to call out inappropriate behavior, some companies predict that boozy after-work events for the holidays could be combustible this year. while many companies used to have the parties on thursday or friday evenings, some are moving them to late monday or tuesday afternoons, said sarah freedman, the vice president of operations for 23 layers, an event planner in new york whose clients include google and west elm.

open bars are being replaced with game zones. one client recently asked for an extremely watered-down john daly to be the partys signature drink, which ms. freeman found strange but probably wise.

after-work events are the front line when it comes to harassment, and companies want more safety precautions now, she said.