st moritz, switzerland (cnn) a number of us athletes have spoken out against donald trump during his presidency -- and skier lindsey vonn has become the latest to have her say.

targeting olympic gold at february's winter olympics in pyeongchang, vonn is in st. moritz, switzerland, where she spoke passionately about what it means to compete for the us ski team.

"well i hope to represent the people of the united states, not the president," vonn told cnn's alpine edge

the dangers of being an alpine skier

the dangers of being an alpine skier 03:03

the dangers of being an alpine skier

the 33-year-old vonn is getting ready for the final act of a long and illustrious career.

as well as competing for a second olympic gold medal in south korea, she is attempting to break the record of 86 world cup victories held by ingemar stenmark since 1989.

away from the slopes, vonn also appears willing to put her head above the parapet and speak out about us politics.

"i take the olympics very seriously and what they mean and what they represent, what walking under our flag means in the opening ceremony," she added.

"i want to represent our country well. i don't think that there are a lot of people currently in our government that do that."

just watched britain's skiing sensation: dave ryding replay more videos ... must watch britain's skiing sensation: dave ryding 03:03

this year trump has been embroiled in a controversy with the nfl and some of the nba's top players -- a spat with significant racial and cultural undertones -- after he blasted prominent athletes for kneeling during the national anthem and refusing to come to the white house.

and vonn revealed she wouldn't accept an invitation to the white house if she were to win gold at pyeongchang.

"absolutely not," said vonn. "no. but i have to win to be invited. no actually i think every us team member is invited so no i won't go.

photos: skiing's speed queen the world's greatest female ski racer lindsey vonn has a busy few months ahead. in february she will be competing in an olympic games for the first time since she clinched the olympic downhill title in vancouver in 2010. hide caption 1 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen she also has ingemar stenmark's world cup record of 86 victories in her sights. vonn is the most successful woman in world cup history with 77 victories. hide caption 2 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen during her career vonn has had to cope with a number of serious injuries, including a broken arm sustained during a heavy crash last november. hide caption 3 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen she fractured her left knee in february 2016 in a crash during a world cup super-g race in soldeu, andorra, but raced the combined event the next day before calling an end to her season. hide caption 4 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen vonn's public profile went galactic when she dated star golfer tiger woods for two years from 2013-2015. hide caption 5 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen lindsey kildow -- as she was then before marrying fellow skier thomas vonn -- won her first world cup race with victory in the downhill at lake louise, canada, in 2004. hide caption 6 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen she made her olympic debut in salt lake city in 2002 as a 17-year-old, finishing 32nd in slalom and sixth in the combined slalom/downhill event. hide caption 7 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen vonn watches on during the ladies singles semifinal match between simona halep and karolina pliskova in june. hide caption 8 of 9 photos: skiing's speed queen can vonn become the goat? hide caption 9 of 9

serious injuries

pyeongchang will be vonn's first games since vancouver 2010, where her downhill triumph turned her into a global star and one of the world's best-paid winter athletes with a net worth, according to forbes, of about $3 million.

vonn has battled with a number of serious injuries throughout her career, including a knee injury in 2013 that kept her out of the 2014 sochi olympics.

just watched the magic of ice fishing replay more videos ... must watch the magic of ice fishing 01:27

last year, she broke her arm and sustained nerve damage during a preseason training crash in the us, delaying the start of her season until january.

vonn endured an underwhelming start to the new season, crashing out of last week's opening downhill event at lake louise.