*editorial note: this content is not provided or commissioned by the credit card issuer. any opinions, analyses, reviews or recommendations expressed in this article are those of the authors alone, and may not have been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by the credit card issuer. this site may be compensated through a credit card issuer partnership.

did you know you can travel the world practically free? using the right airline credit cards can open up a world of travel that would be otherwise unattainable for the majority of people.

with so many credit card offers out there, how do you decide which one is the best for getting you discounted flights? you have to consider annual fees, sign-up bonuses, blackout dates and much more. comparing airline credit cards can be tricky. lucky for you, weve already found the best credit cards to get you flying in no time!

discover it miles apply now show details rates & fees looking for a flexible travel rewards credit card? look no further than the discover it miles card. the discover it miles is the only card that will match all the miles you earn in the first year. with this card, you dont have to worry about blackout dates or rotating categories. this discover card is known for matching reward miles for the first year. this means that if you earn 20,000 miles, discover will match it by giving you another 20,000 miles for a total of 40,000 miles. it has unlimited 1.5 miles on every dollar spent. there is also 0% intro apr for 14 months on purchases and no annual fee.

capital one venture rewards credit card apply now show details say farewell to airline blackout dates. the capital one venture rewards credit card gives you incredible flexibility when it comes to redeeming your miles. with this formidable piece of plastic, new cardholders receive a one-time bonus of 50,000 miles once you spend $3,000 on purchases within 3 months from account opening, equal to $500 in travel. that bonus can be used on any airline, anytime! to make it even sweeter, cardholders earn an unlimited 2 miles per dollar on every purchase, every day. every time you use your card, youre getting closer to your next flight, car rental, hotel stay and more. the annual fee is $0 intro for first year; $95 after that. if you do not think you can justify the annual fee due to very low spending habits, you can always consider the sister card. the capital one ventureone rewards credit card comes with a $0 annual fee, and gives 1.25 miles per dollar on every purchase, every day. the capital one ventureone rewards credit card also offers an intro apr of 0% intro on purchases for 12 months and a valuable one-time bonus of 20,000 miles once you spend $1,000 on purchases within 3 months of account opening, equal to $200 in travel. both of these cards offer rewards on every dollar spent, a great redemption program and have no foreign transaction fees.

bank of america travel rewards credit card apply now call to apply show details for consumers who want to enjoy award flights without paying an annual fee on their credit card, the bank of america travel rewards credit card may be the best way to go. similar to the capital one venture rewards credit card, the points you earn with this credit card can be redeemed in the form of a statement credit to cover ticket purchases with any airline as well as other travel expense like rental cars or hotels. cardholders will also earn 1.5 points per $1 spent on purchases and 20,000 online bonus points if you make at least $1,000 in purchases in the first 90 days of account opening, worth $200 in statement credits toward travel! to top it off, there are no foreign transaction fees and 0% introductory apr on purchases for 12 billing cycles. for those who want to get into the travel rewards space and want to avoid an annual fee, this is a great card choice to start earning flights and so much more!

chase sapphire preferred card apply now show details for travelers with a little more credit card understanding, you cant beat the chase sapphire preferred card. the beauty behind this credit card is that you can redeem your points in a number of ways to ensure you always get a great value. points are worth 1.25 cents apiece if you redeem for travel through the chase online portal, but the savviest cardholders get an even better value by transferring points to one of the partner airline or hotel loyalty programs. the transfer partners include southwest airlines, united airlines, hyatt hotels, marriott and many more. new cardholders can receive an incredible sign-up bonus of 50,000 points after spending $4,000 in the first 3 months, worth $625! these bonus points could be worth even more if strategically redeemed through an airline or hotel partner. for example, my colleague, thomas, was able to redeem two round trip tickets selling for $631 for only 26,000 points and a $22 fee. the points can be redeemed for other items like gift cards or unique experiences. there is a $95 annual fee, but is waived in the first year! for the true travel enthusiast who has an average spend level and is willing to put in a little time and effort, you can really stretch your rewards value with this card.

the bottom line

if youre not already earning points and miles on an airline credit card then youre missing out on the opportunity fly virtually for free. each one of the credit card offers mentioned above are a great place to start you on your way to award flights and worldwide travel. sign up today and be on your way to flying in no time! for those who are looking to take advantage of a specific airline, please consider checking out our list of top individual airline credit card offers.