raul a. reyes is an attorney and member of the usa today board of contributors. follow him on twitter @raulareyes . the opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.

(cnn) as incredible as it may sound, steve bannon has hit a new low. he was in alabama on tuesday, stumping for senate candidate roy moore, when he lashed out at mitt romney, his family, and by implication, an entire religion. bannon, the chairman of breitbart news, was apparently angry at a tweet by romney saying moore in the senate would be "a stain on the gop and on the nation."

in response, at a rally that was ostensibly about moore, bannon went ballistic on romney. he ripped into the former massachusetts governor for not serving in the military. "you hid behind your religion. you went to france as a missionary while men were dying in vietnam. do not talk about honor and integrity." he pointed out that none of romney's five sons served in the military, adding that "judge roy moore has more honor and integrity in his pinky finger than your entire family."

even for a figure as nihilistic as bannon, these remarks were shameful. it speaks volumes that bannon felt the need to go after romney rather than focusing on a positive message for moore's candidacy, if such a thing exists. romney's lack of military service has nothing to do with the alabama election. bannon was shrewdly playing to some evangelicals' long-held mistrust of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints (mormons) -- and getting in a few ugly personal attacks as well.

playing the veteran card against romney is pure hypocrisy on bannon's part, considering he never denigrated his former boss and continued confidant , president donald trump, for his lack of service. trump received multiple deferments for military service during the vietnam war, and none of his children served in the military either. and unlike eric trump and donald trump jr. , who have been involved with their father's campaign and presidency, romney's sons are private citizens. leave them out of this.

just watched trump on his deferments: not an out replay more videos ... must watch trump on his deferments: not an out 02:02

for the record, many mormons have served in the military with distinction, including in vietnam and afghanistan.

bannon's remarks about romney rightfully drew condemnation from sens. orrin hatch and mike lee, both mormons from utah. yet what was especially insidious about bannon's comments was that they were a dog-whistle of religious bigotry.

some members of the southern baptist church do not accept mormons as christians , because of mormons' belief in the prophet joseph smith and his teachings. in taking aim at romney, bannon was deliberately reviving these old prejudices and suspicions about a religion that remains unfamiliar to many americans.

follow cnn opinion join us on twitter and facebook

sure, romney is not perfect. who can forget his infamous "47%" remark that roughly half of americans pay no taxes, or his call for "self-deportation" of undocumented immigrants? yet he does not deserve to be slandered by bannon simply because the breitbart bully can't find much good to say about moore. at least romney has not feuded with gold star families , which is more than can be said for our president.

bannon's remarks about romney were divisive and offensive. they perfectly captured his warped, dystopian worldview.