american actor jim nabors (as pvt. gomer pyle) smiles outside a quonset hut during the filming of an episode of the television comedy series 'gomer pyle, usmc' entitled 'corporal duke,' california, june 26, 1968. the episode was originally broadcast on october 4, 1968.

american actor jim nabors (as pvt. gomer pyle) smiles outside a quonset hut during the filming of an episode of the television comedy series 'gomer pyle, usmc' entitled 'corporal duke,' california, june 26, 1968. the episode was originally broadcast on october 4, 1968.

country music legend mel tillis died early on november 19, according to a statement from his publicist. he was 85. tillis was a prolific singer-songwriter who penned more than 1,000 songs and recorded more than 60 albums in a career that spanned six decades.

longtime gossip columnist liz smith , who started her column at the new york daily news in 1976, died on november 12, according to the newspaper. she was 94. known affectionately as the "the grand dame of dish," smith's legendary work included a chronicle of donald and ivana trump's divorce, which made front-page news.

former major league baseball pitcher roy halladay , a two-time winner of the cy young award, died in a plane crash on november 7, according to the pasco county sheriff's office in florida. halladay was 40.

former nasa astronaut dick gordon, the command module pilot on the second lunar landing mission, died on november 6. he was 88. gordon spent more than 316 hours in space over two missions.

former nasa astronaut dick gordon, the command module pilot on the second lunar landing mission, died on november 6. he was 88. gordon spent more than 316 hours in space over two missions.

hall of fame football quarterback y.a. tittle died october 8 at the age of 90. tittle made the pro bowl seven times over his 17-year career, and he was the nfl's mvp in 1963. in this photo, tittle squats on the field after being hit hard during a game against the pittsburgh steelers in 1964. this became an iconic photograph that helped cement tittle's name in football history.

rock legend tom petty died october 2 after suffering cardiac arrest at his home in malibu, california, according to tony dimitriades, longtime manager of tom petty and the heartbreakers. petty was 66.

singer charles bradley , who was known as the "screaming eagle of soul" because of his raspy voice and stirring performances, died september 23 at the age of 68.

longtime character actor harry dean stanton died september 15 at the age of 91, according to his agent, john s. kelly. stanton, whose gaunt, worn looks were more recognizable to many than his name, appeared in more than 100 movies and 50 tv shows, including "alien," "repo man," "paris, texas" and "pretty in pink."

comedian and civil rights activist dick gregory , who broke barriers in the 1960s and became one of the first african-americans to perform at white clubs, died on august 19. he was 84.

actor martin landau , who starred in the 1960s television show "mission impossible" and won an oscar for playing bela lugosi in the movie "ed wood," died july 15 following "unexpected complications during a short hospitalization," his publicist dick guttman said. landau was 89.

former us sen. jim bunning , the only national baseball hall of fame member ever to serve in congress, died may 26 at the age of 85.

american bobsledder steven holcomb , who piloted a four-man team to olympic gold in 2010, died on may 6. the 37-year-old was found in his room at the us training center in lake placid, new york. no cause of death was given.

filmmaker jonathan demme , whose oscar-winning thriller "the silence of the lambs" terrified audiences, died april 26 at the age of 73. here, demme works on the "silence of the lambs" set with actor anthony hopkins in 1991. demme's other films include "philadelphia," "married to the mob" and a remake of "the manchurian candidate."

actress erin moran , best known as kid sister joanie cunningham on the tv show "happy days," was found dead on april 22. she was 56. moran likely died from complications of stage 4 cancer, officials said.

comedian charlie murphy died april 12 after a battle with leukemia, according to his publicist domenick nati. he was 57. murphy rose to fame for his work on the popular "chapelle's show," where he was a co-star and writer.

actor bill paxton , whose extensive career included films such as "twister," "aliens" and "titanic," died february 26, according to a representative for his family. he was 61. paxton died "due to complications from surgery," a statement said.

photos: people we've lost in 2017

clyde stubblefield, seen here on "late night with jimmy fallon," died february 18 at age 73. he was the drummer for james brown in the 1960s and '70s. he laid down the groove on such brown hits as "cold sweat," "sex machine" and "say it loud, i'm black and i'm proud." the drum break in the song "funky drummer" has been sampled and used in over 1,000 songs.