story highlights ann moses covered david cassidy as a young editor of tiger beat. she says his thrill at his fame soon gave way to loneliness

moses: the androgynous boy's fame became a nightmare, too much for a young person to handle on his own

ann moses was the editor of tiger beat magazine in the late '60s and early '70s. she is the author of "meow! my groovy life with tiger beat's teen idols." the opinions expressed in this commentary are solely those of the author.



(cnn) for a certain segment of pre-teen and young teen girls in the early 1970s, david cassidy was bigger than elvis and the beatles, combined. he was what we called a "number one fave" at tiger beat, the teen magazine where i worked as editor, after david went from being an up-and-coming young actor to the world's biggest pop star, almost literally overnight.

ann moses

nearly a half century ago, magazines like tiger beat were where young girls (and their brothers) went to find out what their "fave"short for "favorite"was up to. there was no tmz, no internet, no youtube, no podcasts, no photos in your phone.

the overnight success of david cassidy, who died tuesday at 67, was created by the same machine that had worked wonders for the monkees, a made-for-tv band that had blasted four young, handsome unknowns into the pop stratosphere with a teen idol trifecta: a weekly prime-time tv show, a constant flow of singles and albums, and stadium concerts all over the world.

photos: heartthrob david cassidy david cassidy will be remembered as the popular '70s heartthrob who starred as singer keith patridge on tv's "the partridge family." take a look at moments from his career and life. hide caption 1 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy "the partridge family," a sitcom about a mother and five children who formed a rock 'n' roll band, gave cassidy a national audience for his music. cassidy, who played keith partridge on the show, captured the spirit of 1970s youth. hide caption 2 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy david cassidy with actress barbara sigel. his breathy voice and wholesome persona broke out from the small screen. at the time, his fan club reportedly was bigger than those of elvis presley and the beatles. hide caption 3 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy pictured here with his tv family, cassidy would eventually tour the world singing hit songs such as "i think i love you" and filling concert halls with screaming teenage girls. hide caption 4 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy wore a bunny suit in an episode of "the partridge family," titled "the last of howard." hide caption 5 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy posters of cassidy graced the walls of young girls everywhere in the early '70s. here he poses on a horse. hide caption 6 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy ever the ladies' man, cassidy poses in a ucla football uniform flanked by five cheerleaders. hide caption 7 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy david cassidy and kay lenz at their wedding at the little church of the west in las vegas in 1977. hide caption 8 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy in concert in london in an undated photo. hide caption 9 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy embraces new bride meryl tanz in easton, maryland, on december 15, 1984. their marriage lasted only about a year. hide caption 10 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy former partridge family cast members david cassidy, left, danny bonaduce and shirley jones reunite on the "the arsenio hall show" in july 1993. it was the first time the three had appeared together since the popular 1970s series left the air. cassidy performed "i think i love you" during the taping. hide caption 11 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy sings during the 1,000th performance of "efx" in 1997 at the mgm grand in las vegas. in just over two years, "efx" drew more than 1 million showgoers with its blend of music, theater, dance, acrobatics and special effects. creating the show cost a record $45 million. hide caption 12 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy received the hippest fashion plate - male award for the role of keith partridge at the first annual tv land awards, which were taped at the palladium in hollywood on march 2, 2003.

hide caption 13 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy sings the national anthem before the start of a 2009 baseball game between the boston red sox and chicago white sox at fenway park in boston. hide caption 14 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy in a "once in a lifetime" concert at the former lg arena in birmingham, england, on november 9, 2012. hide caption 15 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy in a police booking photo after his arrest on charges of driving while intoxicated on august 21, 2013, in schodack, new york. hide caption 16 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy cassidy faces the media as he leaves town court in schodack, new york, on september 3, 2014. the star was arrested for driving under the influence on three separate occasions between 2010 and 2014 and has spoken publicly about his struggles with alcohol.

hide caption 17 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy nbc news' natalie morales, savannah guthrie, cassidy and julien's auctions' martin nolan appear on nbc news' "today" show on march 21, 2013. hide caption 18 of 19 photos: heartthrob david cassidy in this july 22, 2015, photo, cassidy and girlfriend maura rossi pose in his five-bedroom home in fort lauderdale, florida. hide caption 19 of 19

david's own pre-fab band, the partridge family, repeated the same recipe for success  all of it covered, of course, by tiger beat and our several sister publications.

david had showbiz in his blood, and his true desire was to become a serious actor. he'd been raised primarily by his mother, stage actress evelyn ward, in new jersey. he moved to hollywood in his teens, where he had very little face time with his father, actor jack cassidy, whom he idolized.

read more