story highlights the senate and the house each passed their own version of a tax bill

most of the work of the conference committee will happen in private negotiations

(cnn) republicans have celebrated since saturday the passage of their tax bill through the senate, but on monday night some key gop members were thinking of another measure -- one to keep the federal government funded -- when they threatened to vote against a routine step to send the tax plan to a conference committee.

senate republicans passed their tax bill in the early hours of saturday morning and now republicans across the capitol are bracing themselves for their next challenge: conference -- and even that step looked at least for a few moments monday evening to be in jeopardy.

the house of representatives formally voted 222-192 monday night to go to conference committee on the tax bill, where they will work to iron out key differences between their bill and the senate's. the house is also expected monday evening to appoint conferees, the select lawmakers who will be tasked with trying to deliver the reconciled tax bill to president donald trump's desk before christmas.

but there was some unexpected drama to what was a routine vote. the vote was tied for a period as some republicans made a show of their displeasure with plans to implement a two-week continuing resolution to fund the government beyond the current deadline scheduled for friday.

republican leaders have said their plan will extend government funding until december 22, while some members of the conservative house freedom caucus wanted to keep funding going until the end of december so as not to vote right before christmas. after some negotiating, several members changed their votes to yeses, which allowed the bill to pass, though no apparent promises have been made to freedom caucus members. other republicans were livid with the caucus with rep. tom rooney of florida saying he had no idea how you would vote against going to conference on a tax bill you just supported.

read more