jeffrey sachs is a professor and director of the center for sustainable development at columbia university. the opinions expressed in this commentary are his.

(cnn) i am writing from beijing, china, where forward-looking policies in infrastructure, technology and diplomacy have fueled rapid economic growth and even more remarkable technological advancement. by the mid-2020s, china will most likely lead the world in key technologies for low-carbon energy, robotics and advanced transportation, among other areas targeted in china's long-term development strategy.

in this context, the vacuity of us economic policy is especially poignant. president donald trump and republican congressional leaders are rushing to spend a trillion dollars or more on unaffordable tax cuts for the richest americans in a stunning monument to brainlessness.

jeffrey sachs

does any of this matter to the president, mitch mcconnell, paul ryan and most republican members of congress? no. the mega-donors of the republican party, who pull the strings, will reap vast tax savings whether or not there is growth, huge deficits, soaring public debt or harm to the poor. trump and family will win big, despite trump's absurd claims to the contrary . this is a cabal that long ago gave up any interest for mainstream americans, much less for the down and out.

what has happened to american democracy? it has gotten poisoned by partisanship and by big money, in both parties. in early 2009, president barack obama and house speaker nancy pelosi designed a "stimulus" bill behind closed doors at the cost of almost $1 trillion. they claimed at the time, wrongly in my view, that hundreds of billions of dollars of hastily-designed transfer payments and other public outlays were necessary to save the country from a great depression. they passed that mega-spending bill without a single republican vote in the house of representatives. paul krugman assured us at the time, and for a long time after, that deficits in a recession don't matter (despite the fact that the debt would remain well after the downturn was over). eight years later, the public debt is at 77% of gdp, up from around 39% at the time of the stimulus legislation.

read more