(cnn) a single pregnant female, which traveled aboard a coconut palm for part of her journey from asia, could have been the founding mother of australia's rodents, one scientist suggests.

most of the rats and rodents in australia today are descendants of a single species that arrived from asia in two waves, the first 6 million years ago and the second about a million years ago. like colonists of previous centuries, one or multiple rats arrived by way of the sea, scientists believe, clinging to floating foliage set adrift from the islands of indonesia.

"they didn't have to float all the way from indonesia to australia in one voyage," said scott steppan, a professor of biology at florida state university. the sea level was lower at that time, and australia and new guinea were part of the same land mass, so only a set of straits had to be crossed.

floating part of the way, walking at other times, the rats probably made the journey after a storm, just as in modern times, mammals are sometimes found aboard floating vegetation.

so how many rafted onto the continent in each wave?

no one knows, but it could be "as little as one pregnant female," steppan said. if this founding mother survived with at least some of her offspring, there may have been some inbreeding at first, but eventually, separate lineages would develop, allowing for a greater diversity of potential mates.

this evolution, both rapid and extensive, is of interest to scientists because of its potential for practical applications in medicine.

australia before people

before the rats came over, "australia had a diverse animal community of lots of different mammals, but they were all marsupials, so you had kangaroos and wombats and possums and all of their relatives in a variety of different shapes and sizes," steppan said.

placental mammals, including humans, develop embryos inside their bodies, but marsupials have an external pouch for this purpose.

an assemblage of reptiles and birds also greeted the newly arriving rodents, said emily roycroft, a ph.d. candidate at the university of melbourne who also works with the mammal collection at museums victoria.

photos: the world's longest animal migrations photos: the world's longest animal migrations gray whale  an eastern gray whale set a record this week for the longest recorded migration by a mammal -- a journey of nearly 14,000 miles from russian waters to mexico and back. here's a look at some other arduous animal migrations -- many of which are facing human-made challenges. hide caption 1 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations humpback whale  the gray whale's odyssey broke the previous migration record, a 11,706-mile round trip by a humpback whale in 2011. north pacific humpback whales migrate to cool alaskan waters in the summer. at a sedate speed of about one mile per hour, humpbacks return from hawaii with their new calves to feed, mostly on krill and small fish, having lived off their fat reserves for months.

hide caption 2 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations blue wildebeest  at the end of the rainy season east african blue wildebeest head towards pastures new on a circular migration of between 500-,1000 miles around the serengeti. herds can stretch to 25 miles long as they cross the plains, traversing cliffs and rivers, employing "swarm intelligence" to overcome obstacles as a collective. but their migration is threatened by poaching and habitat fragmentation -- when land is fenced off or cut up by roads. hide caption 3 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations plains zebra  wildebeest may wander on a huge circular journey, but according to a 2014 world wildlife foundation study the plains zebra undertakes the longest linear land-mammal migration in africa . the journey between namibia and botswana is a round trip of over 300 miles. along the way zebras face considerable disruption from man-made obstacles such as roads and fences, and farming causing habitat fragmentation. hide caption 4 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations porcupine caribou  in spring, porcupine caribou (named after the porcupine river that runs through their range) migrate north from the boreal forests of canada and alaska to escape the heat and satisfy their large appetites. annual migrations can reach 1,500 miles along well-trodden routes. their migration has been under the shadow of possible oil exploration in the arctic national wildlife refuge (anwr), but plans to designate 12 million acres of the anwr for conservation may yet protect them. hide caption 5 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations great white shark  the longest known shark migration was recorded in 2003, by scientists tracking a great white between the coasts of south africa and australia. the journey, some 6,900 miles, took the shark a mere 99 days. the gps tracker fell off the shark once it arrived, but nine months later the same shark reappeared in south african waters, identified by its dorsal fin. it is estimated the great white traveled at least 12,400 miles.

during their epic journeys great whites are often accidentally caught by trawlers and threatened by illegal fishing for their jaws and fins. hide caption 6 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations leatherback turtle  leatherback turtles migrate vast distances to beaches where they lay their eggs. leatherbacks typically migrate about 6,000 miles, but some have gone much further. over 647 days one leatherback traveled 12,700 miles between papua, indonesia and north west america, before losing its gps receiver halfway through the return trip. the journey was one of the longest ocean migrations ever recorded. but rising sea levels and beach erosion are forcing turtles to travel to new and unfamiliar sites to create their nests. many populations are critically endangered hide caption 7 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations adelie penguin 

a 2013 census suggested ice retreat was -- contrary to other polar species -- actually boosting penguin numbers at a colony on beaufort island. adelie penguins migrate in an 8,000-mile circle around the ross sea off antarctica, on "fast ice" that develops during the winter. doing so means they stay in sunlight, the clockwise migration taking them back to land and their breeding colonies for the summer months.a 2013 census suggested ice retreat was -- contrary to other polar species -- actually boosting penguin numbers at a colony on beaufort island. scientists recorded a population growth of 53% across 20 years; it is believed the increase is due to the diminishing journey between land and the sea where adlie penguins feed. hide caption 8 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations monarch butterfly  the migration of the monarch butterfly takes four generations on a 5,500-mile journey. starting in central mexico and california, the first generation fly to texas and oklahoma where it lays its eggs and dies. the next generation takes off further north before doing the same. the third generation reaches america's great lakes and succumbs before the fourth generation flies all the way back south -- up to 3,000 miles -- to lay its eggs. the current population has declined sharply from around one billion in the mid-1990s to a mere 35 million last year, according to the u.s. center for biological diversity . the use of herbicide by farmers is being blamed for reducing the availability of milkweed, their primary food source. climate change also could disrupt the butterfly's migration pattern. hide caption 9 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations south indian dragonflies  biologist charles anderson believes that certain dragonfly species travel between southern india and southern africa every year, stopping in the maldives and skirting the east african coast along the way. if he is correct, the migration, a round trip of 8,000-11,000 miles, is the longest by any insect and all the more remarkable considering the lack of fresh water available. hide caption 10 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations alaskan bar-tailed godwit  the alaskan bar-tailed godwit holds the record for the longest nonstop journey through the air. its annual migration is approximately 15,500 miles, but its journey between alaska and new zealand -- a journey of 7,000 miles -- is done without food or rest in a staggering eight days.

scientists have concerns that due to habitat loss, future generations will struggle to accrue the necessary fat reserves required for the journey, but it is thought that the godwit is resilient enough to cope with climate change for at least the near future. hide caption 11 of 12 photos: the world's longest animal migrations arctic tern 

but climate change may be forcing arctic terns further north to breed. due to fatigue, arctic terns hold the record for the longest annual migration recorded by any animal. moving between greenland and antarctica in a zig-zag route, the bird covers 44,000 miles a year. with an average lifespan of 30 years, this means the arctic tern would cover around 1.3 million miles in its lifetime -- the equivalent to going to the moon and back three times.but climate change may be forcing arctic terns further north to breed. due to fatigue, many more birds are dying along the way hide caption 12 of 12

to survive, the rats evolved to fill roles in the ecosystem, resulting in a diversity of distinct rodent groups across the continent, she explained.

"it wasn't until the arrival of europeans into australia that many native rodent species started suffering massive declines in population numbers," she said. "since about 1850, at least 14 native species of australian rodents have gone extinct." predators and competitors -- foxes, cats and the "black rat," "brown rat" and "house mouse" -- along with urbanization took a toll.

today, there are about 50 native species found nowhere else in the world but australia, roycroft said. and more than 90 species are native to new guinea that similarly originate from southeast asia.

karen roberts, collection manager of vertebrate zoology at museums victoria, said the native australian rodents "make up the vast majority of rodent species here. genetically , the rodents found in australia today are most closely related to the rodents of indonesia."

with their asian ancestry, these native species are related to rodents throughout the world, a significant detail for those who study them.

one big happy 'superfamily'

the natives are a subgroup of the muroids , the most diverse group of mammals in terms of numbers of species, steppan said: "almost one out of every three species of mammal is a member of this one group, which is a superfamily."

this "unusually diverse" family includes mice, rats, hamsters, gerbils and "a whole host of other specialized forms that people are not familiar with," he said.

among the unfamiliar forms are the native australian rodents, such as the fish-eating rats that can swim, two-legged hoppers that look like little kangaroos and tree-dwelling rodents that chew on leaves all day long.

overall, the muroids are a "group of mammals that, relative to their age, is the most successful from an evolutionary standpoint: they have the greatest amount of diversification going on," steppan said, adding that this is the reason they are studied more than other mammals.

if we want to explain life on earth, we need to focus on rapidly evolving groups, such as the muroid rodents and the species within this superfamily, including distant rodent "cousins" scattered throughout indonesia and australia, steppan said.

"whatever is exceptional to make them so diverse can give us insight into how everything else is diversified," he said.

australia is a unique example of an isolated continent that didn't have any rat-like species until the first rodent drifted in from asia. in essence, then, it's a laboratory for evolutionary biologists to see what happens when you don't have competition, steppan said. and what happened was very rapid diversification into a lot of very different species, large and small, able to live in deserts and treetops.

"moving into a new area with less competition doesn't actually explain as much as we thought it would," steppan said. "there's clearly just many things going on that can cause one group to diversify quickly, and it's actually really hard to tease apart which factor in which case is the actual explanation.

follow cnn health on facebook and twitter see the latest news and share your comments with cnn health on facebook and twitter.

"on a more practical level, understanding the evolution of this group also can flag a lot of useful information about disease," he said. "some species of rodents are hosts for diseases, and many of those diseases actually co-evolved with their hosts." so as the rodent host diversified, the disease diversified with it. understanding species evolution helps us better understand how to respond to diseases, he said.

on a basic science level, they "can tell us the most," steppan said.