story highlights women who attended services had lower rates of death during a study period

they also had higher rates of social support and optimism and had lower rates of depression

doctors are increasingly aware of the importance of religion for the well-being of their patients

(cnn) many americans say they attend church because it helps them stay grounded and gives them spiritual guidance. a new study suggests that regular attendance may also help increase their lifespan.

researchers looked at data on nearly 75,000 middle-age female nurses in the united states as part of the nurses' health study. the participants answered questions about whether they attended religious services regularly every four years between 1992 and 2012, and about other aspects of their lives over the years.

the researchers found that women who went to church more than once a week had a 33% lower risk of dying during the study period compared with those who said they never went. less-frequent attendance was also associated with a lower risk of death, as women who attended once a week or less than weekly had 26% and 13% lower risk of death, respectively.

women who regularly attended religious services also had higher rates of social support and optimism, had lower rates of depression and were less likely to smoke. however, the researchers took into account these differences between churchgoers and non-churchgoers when they calculated the decrease in death rates of 13% to 33%.

going to church could have a number of additional benefits that could, in turn, improve longevity, but the researchers were not able to examine them with the available data. attendance could promote self-discipline and a sense of meaning and purpose in life, or it could provide an experience of the transcendent, said tyler j. vanderweele, professor of epidemiology in the harvard t.h. chan school of public health. vanderweele led the new research, which was published monday in the journal jama internal medicine.

read more