photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos shalane flanagan crosses the finish line to win the new york city marathon on sunday, november 5. it was the first time an american took the women's title since 1977. hide caption 1 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos the houston astros celebrate after defeating the los angeles dodgers 5-1 in game 7 of the world series on wednesday, november 1. it is the first time the astros have won the world series. hide caption 2 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos georges st-pierre applies a rear-naked choke to michael bisping on his way to winning the ufc middleweight title on saturday, november 4. it was the first fight in nearly four years for st-pierre, a former champion who retired in 2013. hide caption 3 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos dallas wide receiver dez bryant leaps for a pass during an nfl game against kansas city on sunday, november 5. hide caption 4 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos new orleans forward anthony davis is defended by minnesota's shabazz muhammad during an nba game on wednesday, november 1. hide caption 5 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos filip krajinovic celebrates his win over john isner in the semifinals of the paris masters on saturday, november 4. hide caption 6 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos colorado defensive back dante wigley, left, breaks up a pass intended for arizona state wide receiver n'keal harry during a college football game in tempe, arizona, on saturday, november 4. hide caption 7 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos referee arthur mercante pulls deontay wilder away from bermane stiverne after wilder's first-round victory in new york on saturday, november 4. mercante stopped the fight after wilder, the wbc heavyweight champion, floored stiverne for the third time in the round. hide caption 8 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos florent geroux celebrates aboard gun runner after they won the breeders' cup classic on saturday, november 4. gun runner dominated the race, leading from wire to wire. hide caption 9 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos jesus rueda, a defender for cypriot soccer club apoel, falls into the goal during a champions league match against borussia dortmund on wednesday, november 1. hide caption 10 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos georgia wide receiver mecole hardman jr. breaks through a banner before a college football game against south carolina on saturday, november 4. georgia is the no. 1 team in the college football playoff rankings. hide caption 11 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos oklahoma city guard raymond felton, right, competes for a loose ball with milwaukee forward giannis antetokounmpo during an nba game on tuesday, october 31. hide caption 12 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos baylor quarterback charlie brewer is tackled by kansas cornerback kyle mayberry during a college football game in lawrence, kansas, on saturday, november 4. hide caption 13 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos vegas forward david perron, center, celebrates a teammate's goal during an nhl game in ottawa on saturday, november 4. vegas won 5-4 to continue its hot start to the season. the expansion team improved to 9-4 with the victory. hide caption 14 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos gremio midfielder jailson jumps over barcelona's matias oyola during a libertadores cup match in porto alegre, brazil, on wednesday, november 1. hide caption 15 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos michael marinaro tosses kirsten moore-towers into the air during the cup of china, a grand prix figure-skating event in beijing on friday, november 3. the canadian pair finished in third place. hide caption 16 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos camille gerondeau, a flanker for french rugby club clermont, grabs the ball during a lineout against montpellier on sunday, november 5. hide caption 17 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos new york giants wide receiver tavarres king keeps his feet inbounds as he catches a touchdown pass against the los angeles rams on sunday, november 5. it was one of the few bright spots for the giants, who lost 51-17. hide caption 18 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos marcos lopes, center, is swarmed by his monaco teammates after scoring the opening goal of their champions league match against besiktas on wednesday, november 1. the match ended 1-1 in istanbul. hide caption 19 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos france's benjamin garcia is tackled by australian players during a rugby league world cup match on friday, november 3. hide caption 20 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos swiss athlete manuela schar celebrates after she won the new york city marathon's wheelchair division on sunday, november 5. hide caption 21 of 23

photos: what a shot! 23 amazing sports photos new orleans running back alvin kamara celebrates a touchdown with fans during an nfl game against tampa bay on sunday, november 5. kamara scored two touchdowns in the saints' 30-10 victory. hide caption 22 of 23