james a. gagliano is a cnn law enforcement analyst and a retired fbi supervisory special agent. he also serves as an adjunct assistant professor at st. john's university in queens, new york. follow him on twitter @jamesagagliano. the views expressed in this commentary are his own.

(cnn) yesterday, cnn reported that over the summer special counsel robert mueller had removed an fbi agent from the investigation into the trump campaign's possible ties to russia. widely touted as experienced in high-level, sensitive investigation supervision, peter strzok, a deputy assistant director, had been "laterally transferred" to a post within the human resources department (hrd).

while strzok may have made a mistake discussing political biases on government devices, his banishment to hrd -- the fbi's equivalent of siberia -- seems unduly harsh. mueller's decision may, therefore, be more indicative of a special prosecutor trying to hold onto the reins of his investigation, particularly at a moment when president donald trump may feel inclined to intervene. after all, on friday, his former national security adviser, michael flynn, pleaded guilty to lying to the fbi.

james gagliano

for those unfamiliar with fbi culture, hrd postings are typically an acknowledgement that an agent has exhausted his investigative growth potential, reached a roadblock on the executive development (promotion) ladder or made a misstep that is impossible to recover from.

prior to strzok's demotion, he had worked and supervised innumerable high-profile cases. in fact, former fbi director james comey had hand-selected him to lead the investigation into hillary clinton's private e-mail server in 2015.

and robert anderson, jr., the retired executive assistant director at the fbi, and former teammate of mine on the fbi's hostage rescue team (hrt), tells me that strzok is one of the finest counterintelligence agents the bureau has ever produced. he insists that the man who served under him in a multitude of deputy positions, and who he promoted several times, would never bring personal biases into an investigation he was overseeing.

read more