a former spokesman for failed democratic presidential candidate hillary clinton took a shot at president trump on twitter monday, accusing him of reflexively just wanting to undo anything president barack obama did while in offi ce.

if barack obama cured cancer, donald trump would try to bring it back, josh schwerin tweeted.

advertisement

schwerin was apparently tweeting in response to trumps reduction of a national monument in utah, which was established by a late executive order by obama. it was one of two monuments that trump reduced, sparking outrage from environmentalists.

the families and communities of utah know and love this land the best, and you know the best how to take care of your land, trump said during a visit to utah this week. you know how to protect it, and you know best how to conserve this land for many, many generations to come.

trump has pushed to roll back a number of policies of his predecessor. perhaps most controversially, trump repealed daca, an obama-era policy giving amnesty to illegal immigrants brought to the country as children  although he has called on congress to find a legislative solution before it expires.

he has also declared that iran is not in compliance with the iran nuclear deal  a first step to ending the deal. he has also started the process by which the u.s. will withdraw from the 2015 paris climate change agreement. both agreements were signed by president obama.

trump has also joined republicans in congress in calling and pushing for the repeal of obamacare, although the senate has been unable to pass a repeal-and-replace law. in the wake of that failure, he has rolled back some of the obamacare requirements.

but the remark by schwerin is the latest in a long line of angry remarks to come from hillary clinton officials  including clinton herself, who has repeatedly disputed the validity of the election results and has not shied away from criticizing the president.

adam shaw is a breitbart news politics reporter based in new york. follow adam on twitter: @adamshawny.