apparently, the gop is now the party of child molestation! at least the media tell me thats the meaning of president trumps endorsement of senate candidate roy moore.

are we allowed to mention that moore denies the charges?

advertisement

its hard to disprove accusations from 40 years ago  thats why we have statutes of limitations  but, despite that, there are a surprising number of problems with the allegations against moore.

one accuser has been called a liar by her own stepson, who says hes voting for moore. another neglected to mention that moore sent her brother to prison.

in defense of one of moores accusers, gloria allred produced a yearbook allegedly signed by moore, apparently in two different inks and giving his title as d.a. he was not the district attorney and didnt sign his name that way. allred refuses to produce the yearbook for handwriting analysis or to deny that its a forgery.

contrary to what you have heard one million times a day on tv, there arent multiple accusers. there are two, and thats including the one with the fishy yearbook inscription whose stepson says shes lying.

the other accusers claim he dated them when they were 16 to 19 years old and moore was in his early 30s  or younger than jerry seinfeld was (39) when he dated 17-year-old shoshanna lonstein.

that would also make moore 15 years younger than bill clinton when he had a 22-year-old intern performing oral sex on him in the oval office. moores date accusers say he did nothing more than kiss them.

the media throw the dating claims in with the molestation claims so they can keep howling about multiple accusers. in fact, only two women are alleging anything that, if true, would merit national attention.

tv anchors think its very clever of them to ask anyone who isnt bowled over by the claims of moores (two) accusers: so youre calling the women liars?

checkmate!

theres a lot of room between hes a child molester and the women are liars.

they could be misremembering. they could be confusing moore with someone else. they could be suggestible. they could be delusional. they could have repeated the story to themselves so many times that they believe it. they could be really, really disgusted with jerry seinfeld.

the main accuser has gotten a lot of her facts wrong, such as where she was living at the time (she moved to another town 10 days after meeting moore); the corner where she allegedly met moore for their liaisons (she named a corner more than a mile away from her house, across a busy intersection); and when she began to get into trouble with boys and alcohol (it was before meeting moore, not after).

it was 40 years ago! but its just weeks before the election and thats the medias favorite time to produce wild accusations against republicans.

four days before the 1992 presidential election, independent counsel lawrence walsh dropped an indictment of reagans defense secretary, caspar weinberger, which seemed to implicate president george h.w. bush in a lie. bush lost the election, and about a month later a judge threw out the indictment.

in the middle of the 2004 presidential campaign, cbss dan rather produced forged documents allegedly proving that president george w. bush had shirked his national guard service decades earlier.

in september 2006, just before the midterm elections, the media released gop congressman mark foleys creepy emails to house pages. no physical contact was alleged. the corpus delicti was that foley told pages they looked hot in their soccer shorts.

the entire gop was crucified by the media for not having discovered this pedophile in its midst. republican congressmen who had never met foley lost their seats because of the medias timing of the email release.

more than 20 years earlier, a democratic congressman, gerry studds, who had actually buggered a 17-year-old page, indignantly defied his house censure and proudly stood for re-election. his outraged massachusetts constituents elected him six more times. washington post columnist colman mccarthy denounced the witch hunt against studds, saying his critics wanted to torch the congressman for his private life.

when studds died in 2006, the washington posts headline on his obituary was: gerry studds; gay pioneer in congress. the new york times headline was, gerry studds dies at 69; first openly gay congressman.

i supported rep. mo brooks in the primary, but alabamians would be crazy to let the media vilification of moore affect their vote. moores real crime is that hes a believing christian who goes around wantonly quoting the bible on sodomy. journalists react to that like linda blair in the exorcist.

the media say that republicans support moore just because they want another gop vote in the senate. i support moore just because i hate the media.