after remaining quiet for some time on the senate race between republican roy moore and democrat doug jones the nra has jumped in with both feet, spending over $50,000 for postcards urging alabamans not to cast a vote for jones.

on november 20, breitbart news reported that jones believes the second amendment has limitations. he suggested that limitations translate into governments ability to regulate, telling the alabama political reporter, weve got limitations on all constitutional amendments in one form or another.

advertisement

he also voiced support for expanding background checks to gun shows.

on november 27, breitbart news reported that jones avoided answering politico when the outlet asked him to reassure alabama voters that he would not take away their guns. a day earlier, november 26, president trump tweeted that jones would be bad for the second amendment:

the last thing we need in alabama and the u.s. senate is a schumer/pelosi puppet who is weak on crime, weak on the border, bad for our military and our great vets, bad for our 2nd amendment, and wants to raises taxes to the sky. jones would be a disaster!  donald j. trump (@realdonaldtrump) november 26, 2017

ashley balcerzak reports that the nra is engaged in the race, spending $54,000 for postcards urging alabamans not to cast their vote for pro-gun control doug jones:

https://mobile.twitter.com/abalcerzak/status/938483586147278848

roy moore is pro-second amendment, which includes being pro-national reciprocity and opposing an expansion of background checks. in fact, breitbart news reported that moore opposes an expansion of background checks for gun purchases. he views an expansion of background checks as a ruse by which the left can secure government-mandated firearm registration.

moore has also been vocal in his opposition to a ban on assault weapons or high capacity magazines.

awr hawkins is an award winning second amendment columnist for breitbart news, the host of the breitbart podcast bullets, and the writer/curator of down range with awr hawkins, a weekly newsletter focused on all things second amendment, also for the breitbart news. he is the political analyst for armed american radio. follow him on twitter: @awrhawkins. reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com. sign up to get down range at breitbart.com/downrange.