photograph by pictorial press ltd / alamy

brian eno, reflection

in january of this year, brian eno, the ambient-music pioneer, released two versions of his newest album, reflection. the cd, vinyl, and digital versions contained a fifty-four-minute-long ambient soundscape; alternatively, an ios app offered unlimited music created through a generative algorithm. in both versions, the sonic palette is the samethere are twinkling chimes, dolphinlike whistles, gliding synths, and chords played on some kind of infinitely reverberating vibraphone. but the app version of reflection, to which ive become addicted, is never the same twice. the timbre of the music varies with the time of day, and its tonality shifts with seasonal software updates. (the autumn update, which arrived in september, seems to have introduced a little more dissonance.) listening to the app isnt like listening to a normal album. somehow, the fact that the music isnt made by a person makes it especially ambientits less like a composition to which one owes attention and more like a field recording from an alternative version of nature. meanwhile, every now and then, the music goes somewhere completely unexpected, finding a strange and beautiful algorithmic possibility to which it will never return. im an early riser, and i love to listen to reflection in the pre-dawn hours, while i read or write. then, when i need to enter reality, ive been listening to only once away my son, an awe-inspiring, psychedelic, nine-minute sound odyssey released, last month, by eno and kevin shields, of my bloody valentine. if reflection is best experienced on headphones, only once away my son is an excellent argument for turning up your stereo system (and, ideally, your subwoofer)its basically the soundtrack to the book of genesis. fortified by immersion in these transporting worlds of sound, im ready to tackle the day.  joshua rothman

stanley cowell, illusion suite

the digital release of the complete ecm records catalogue is the gift that keeps on giving. one of the many treasures from the labels early days that i didnt mention in my earlier roundup is illusion suite, a 1972 trio recording by the pianist stanley cowell, whos joined by the bassist stanley clarke and the drummer jimmy hopps. cowell presided over one of the most important jazz recordings of the late sixties, brilliant circles; he and hopps were founding members of the exciting quartet music, inc., but, with his own trio on illusion suite, cowell finds a remarkable tone that, as personal as it is, set something like a template for a new modernist classicism. a conservatory-trained musician, cowell has a full, lush, and nuanced piano sound (and ecm reproduces it vibrantly); he composed all six tunes on the album, and they cover a wide musical range, from the polytonal ballad emil danenberg (named for a piano professor at his alma mater, oberlin) and the intricate funk of miss viki to the hard-driving post-bop of cal massey. an eclecticist, cowell treats the studio like a realm apart. he uses piano, electric piano, and thumb piano, and also overdubs of clarkes bowed bass. an inspired, imaginative, energetic improviser, cowell digs deep into the harmonic complexities of his tunes while building mercurial melodic lines on the fly. in short, its a trio recording that opens out prismatically into the music of the futureand its emphases and inflections are just as timely now. richard brody

ohio players, love slips through my fingers

i have a playlist on spotify that i created in 2013 featuring songs that, if i were ever asked to do such a thing, i would include on a movie soundtrack. the first song on it is love slips through my fingers, performed by the nineteen-seventies r. & b. outfit ohio players. (the song could easily be included on a northern soul mix, as well.) a few dusty piano chords segue into a triumphant mlange of horns and percussions. the upbeat rhythm of the tune is balanced by its gloomy lyrics: cupid, please, have pity on me / and send me a love with no more misery. like the best twentieth-century pop songs, the track is compact, coming in at under two and a half minutes, and the vocals have that soulful, aching sound with which anyone who has had her heart broken is very familiar. the ohio players are best known for their hits such as love rollercoaster, which the red hot chili peppers covered for the 1996 beavis and butt-head do america soundtrack. they are also responsible for some of the most legendary album covers of all time. love slips through my fingers is available on a little-known digital compilation called fan-tastic ohio players. the whole collection deserves a spin, but this is the song that i want to hear as the credits roll. lauretta charlton

in search of new music? every wednesday, our writers and editors tell you about songs theyre listening to. browse the new yorker recommends to discover more cultural recommendations from our staff.