wang jing was so ashamed of what had happened to her that, for the first hour of our conversation, in june, at the brooklyn district attorneys office, she made no eye contact, as if doing so would break some spell and prevent her from finishing her story. she spoke haltingly in mandarin, the only language we shared; shed have been more comfortable in cantonese or taishanese, the dialect of the small city in guangdong province on whose rural outskirts she was born. but, more than that, she seemed unused to being listened to in any language. she asked me not to use her real name and had brought along her son, who is in his late twenties. he sat impassive but watchful, accustomed, like many children of immigrants, to making sure that his mother wasnt taken advantage of. wang, who works as a health aide for elderly chinese, is sixty-one and careworn, with drooping eyelids so thin that i could see the wine-colored veins that threaded through them. since coming to the united states, thirty-two years ago, she has been outside new york just once, and the only places she has lived in are the manhattan chinatown and the brooklyn one, in bensonhurst. one afternoon in late april of last year, she was leaving the bensonhurst branch of marshalls when an agitated woman in her early forties rushed up to her. im looking for a doctor called xu, the woman said, in rapid-fire cantonese. its urgentfor my daughter. wang had been to plenty of traditional chinese-medicine practitioners in the neighborhood, but shed never heard of a dr. xu. he is very well known here, the woman went on. i think hes my daughters only hope. she said that the girl had begun her first menstrual bleeding two weeks earlier and nothing would staunch the flow. friends spoke of dr. xu as a miracle worker, but no one knew where to find him. a woman passing by overheard and interjected, are you talking about the dr. xu? hes a treasure. i have him to thank for my mother-in-laws incredible recovery. when the first woman asked for more details, the newcomer shrugged. hes become a real recluse in recent years, she said. i dont even know if he sees patients anymore. wang was curious. shed had her own share of ailments. a decade ago, she had surgery to remove a tumor in one of her ovaries, and, a dozen or so years before that, her husband had suffered a back injury that left him unable to work. she became responsible for supporting their two young children. i would tell the kids, mama is not hungry todayyou guys hurry up and eat,  she told me. at the time, she made around a hundred and thirty dollars a week, at a garment factory on grand street, and the physical demands of the work had ravaged her body. as wang and her new acquaintances talked, it turned out that the woman whod met dr. xu was from a village not far from where wang had grown up. she introduced herself as liu, asked about wangs husband and children, and extended an open invitation to have tea at a bakery she owned with her husband. wang was touched by her solicitude. it reminded her of life back in taishan, where youd constantly cross paths with acquaintances and there was a web of trust, woven over generations, from the reciprocal exchange of favors. if you had an unfamiliar problem, youd seek out a shu ren , a familiar person, to help. in the u.s., however, chinese people shared less about themselves. everything is business, wang said. wang was talking about her children when liu called out to a woman with large sunglasses and a backpack who was walking toward them. we were just looking for your grandfather! liu exclaimed. dr. xus granddaughter said that he had been very sick and had stopped taking patients. he now devoted himself to good deeds, in order to build karma as his end approached. liu begged the granddaughter to make an exception, and she agreed to try to talk him round. he will refuse your money, she warned, as she left. if he agrees to see you, it will be strictly as friends. ive never had terribly good fortune, wang told me. its always been endurancelife lived on a boiling kettle. but for the first time in a long while she felt as if her luck were turning. she had heard about doctors who had amazing powers, but shed never encountered one. now it seemed that she might get a free consultation. the women waited on the street, and when the granddaughter returned her face had darkened. she addressed wang by name, although wang didnt recall having given her name. its about your unmarried son, the granddaughter said. wang hadnt told her about her son, either. the granddaughter said that dr. xu had lit three sticks of incense at an altar, one for each woman. lius stick burned brightly, because of the good deed she had done by referring the others, but the other two sticks immediately blew out. the mother of the girl with menstrual problems was told that an offended spirit in the underworld was responsible. the news for wang was even more dire: her son was in mortal danger. because she had recently crossed a street in the exact spot where a pregnant woman had been killed two decades earlier, the spirit of the unborn child, a girl, had latched on to wang, intent upon claiming her son for a husband. my grandfather sees a great white tiger, a very ill omen, the woman warned. wang asked if she couldnt just keep her son safe at home. the woman shook her head. if the spirit wants him, she can make the most harmless actions fatal, she said. your son might choke on his next sip of water. wang was terrified. everyone in china knew about ming hun , or ghost marriages. the mother of one of wangs classmates had lost a son at a young age and was plagued with ill health for years, until a local shaman found a suitable wife in the underworld, a girl in the village who had died in infancy. now wang listened, as dr. xus granddaughter told her that, to avoid the curse, her valuables must be blessed immediately. she added a caveat: you cant contact anyone. you will spook the spirit into taking action faster. it was my sons life, wang told me. how could i have taken a chance? liu accompanied wang to her apartment, to fetch her valuables. everything will be o.k., sister, she said. shed endured difficulties herself, she confided, and dr. xu had always seen her through them. he doesnt take a cent, she said. and, of course, no funny business with your valuables. she held up her hand to show wang a gold band set with carved jade. how else would i still have this ring? as they reached wangs apartment building, liu offered a last admonition: just be careful. dr. xus eyes are omnipresent. if you try to collect only a portion of your valuables, the blessings wont work and your son will remain in danger. like many immigrants, wang had never had much use for banks. her life savingsaround a hundred and fifty thousand dollarswere hidden in a box and in other places around her bedroom. not even her family knew how much was in it. she took the money and some wedding jewelry she almost never wore, put everything into plastic bags, and placed the bundle in a zippered shopping bag. the granddaughter was waiting for them on the street corner where theyd met. she held out a large bag and told wang to put her package inside. then she spun wang around and told her to join her palms together in prayer, bow, and recite a chant: peace and safety to my child, may the bodhisattva protect him. wang vaguely remembers the granddaughter tracing her fingers through the air, as if drawing calligraphy, and at one point holding both hands up to the mute gray sky. but, almost as soon as the ceremony had begun, it was over. the bag was returned to wang, along with two bottles of spring water. one was to be used to cook rice, and the other was for drinking: everyone in the family must take a sip. the bag should not be opened for forty-nine days or the blessing would be undone. liu took wangs hands. its fate that we met, she said, by way of farewell. as wang walked home, she felt that the bag had become oddly lighter than she remembered. she broke into a run, clutching the bag, and tore it open as soon as she was home. inside, all she found was boxes of cornstarch and laundry detergent. that evening, her son took her to the police.

the first reports of what have become known as blessing scams appeared in the chinese media around the turn of the century. in 2002, there were more than eight hundred incidents in hong kong, leading the police to establish a dedicated task force. investigators determined that the suspects were middle-aged women, working in crews of three or four, and that almost all of them came from southern coastal provinces, whose proximity to the wealth of hong kong and taiwan creates tempting opportunities for criminals. the scammers travelled first to taiwan and other cities across asia, and then to chinese communities in the united states, canada, and australia. in the summer of 2012, in san francisco, there were more than fifty incidents, which netted an estimated $1.5 million in cash and goods. nine people have since stood trial, and received prison sentences of up to four years. the prosecution said that the defendants were professionals who had been conning elderly chinese women around the globe. the countries stamped on their passports included indonesia, japan, malaysia, brunei, and cambodia. in new york currently, there are around ten reported cases each year. kevin hui, a detective in the new york police departments organized-crime unit who worked on wangs case, told me that, after a spike in the number of cases in 2012, he and his colleagues contacted police in hong kong in an effort to better understand the phenomenon. in 2014, after tracking the scammers intensively, the n.y.p.d. lodged sealed indictments against a number of suspects, but, before arrests could be made, they all disappeared, presumably escaping to china. in early 2016, police managed to arrest three scammers , who took felony pleas and served prison time. hui said that his department was in the process of following two gangs at work in new york. policing blessing scams is made harder by the fact that victims are frequently too scared or humiliated to report the crime. earlier this year, i spoke to the late eddie chiu, a hong kong native who for many years headed the lin sing association, one of the oldest chinatown community organizations, and often advised elderly victims who were reluctant to involve the authorities. some feared that doing so would expose irregularities in their immigration or tax status. they are also afraid of losing face, he said. they are saving that money for their burial arrangements or to give to their grandchildren, but sometimes their own children dont even know about it. the victims worried that their children would berate them for being credulous and for having kept the money secret in the first place. they are fearful and embarrassed, he said. the scammers know it, and they exploit it. in 2014, the vulnerability of such communities led kenneth p. thompson, brooklyns district attorney at the time, to set up the immigrant fraud unit. its work has since been expanded by his successor, eric gonzalez. one-third of the population here in brooklyn are immigrants, and the chinese community is the fastest-growing one, gonzalez told me one afternoon in his office. gonzalez, who is a second-generation puerto rican, spoke of witnessing the process of assimilation within his own family. there are many factors at workcultural barriers, social isolationthat make these immigrants easy targets.

in the months after wang was defrauded, the police received reports of several similar incidents across the city, and they closed in on eight suspects. one day, hui, driving through chinatown while off duty, saw a group of scammers in action. he called for backup, and another officer filmed everything and then made arrests. officers caught four of the eight people theyd been tracking. as the police and prosecutors reviewed the evidence, it became clear that one of the scammers had been involved in a number of incidents. it was the woman who had introduced herself to wang as liu. her real name was su xuekun. at the district attorneys office, i met two prosecutors who had been assigned to the casekin ng, who was born in hong kong and speaks cantonese, and jos interiano, who is honduran-american. they told me that although su had been in the country for only a few months, she had been extremely active. two months after defrauding wang, suthis time playing the part of the mother with the menstruating daughterwas part of a group that conned a fifty-four-year-old woman in sunset park out of nineteen thousand dollars. su had also been implicated in operations in manhattan and in flushing, queens, which netted more than four hundred thousand dollars. ng told me, we have video footage of her in the act, and lineup identification. su was indicted on four counts of grand larceny, relating to two separate incidents. because there was more than one offense, prosecutors were able to indict her under a hate-crime statute and seek a stiffer sentence. it is rare for someone to be prosecuted for a hate crime against people of her own ethnicity, but interiano said that he believed the case warranted it. the term hate crime is poorly worded, he said, and suggested that bias crime better represented the intent of the statute. if you look at the statute itself, the word hate is actually omitted. the fact is, all our victims shared several characteristics: they were all female, they were older, they were all chinese. all but one of the cases that the immigrant fraud unit has handled involved perpetrators who share the ethnic background of their victims. ng said, its only natural, whether its the west indian or the latino or the east asian community. he laughed as he recalled, when he was a child, seeing his parents get swindled by a chinese car salesman. you speak the language, and you feel like you have an instant understanding and bond. scammers prey upon that. interiano and ng, like the police, think that the scammers were part of a well-organized crime ring. different crews all used the same stories, and, whereas most chinese immigrants depend on family connections to establish themselves, the suspects arrived knowing no one, but had no problem instantly finding accommodations and employment. interiano said that he didnt consider the victims to be unusually gullible. rather, the scam was perfectly devised to take advantage of people who had few sources of information. the initial conversation with the victim was a way of harvesting personal information. using a cell phone, the first two scammers could have the third listen in, or they could send texts of the pertinent points. the third scammer would then seem to have supernatural insight into the victims life, making the warning about the family member in danger more credible. at every stage, the gang would hurry things along, to heighten panic. interiano said, by the time that the victim is given a way of solving all these problems, they just want to get out of it: o.k., fine, ill do whatever it takes to save my family member. 

i met su xuekun on a bright december morning at kings county supreme court. her court-appointed lawyer, morris shamuil, a gentle, harried man in his forties, greeted me on the benches outside the courtroom where she was being arraigned. he had seen his client only twice since her arrest, both times in court, and couldnt communicate with her unless a translator was present. su, handcuffed and wearing a khaki sweatsuit, was led into the courtroom. during the arraignment, she bowed and smiled deferentially at the judge, danny chun. su pleaded not guilty, and, to shamuils disappointment, chun upheld the hate-crime charges. jessica tells me you have a twitter following in the six figures. afterward, shamuil took me downstairs to a visiting area where su was waiting for a van to take her back to rikers island. she was tanned, with thick brown hair that was frizzy and blond at the edgesthe vestiges of a dye-and-perm job. we sat down to talk, separated by a plexiglass window. she apologized for her poor mandarin and, whenever a word or a phrase eluded her, repeated the cantonese equivalent to herself in increasingly agitated tones, sighing with frustration. su told me that she had grown up in the guangdong countryside, and began working in the fields at the age of ten. she longed to move to the city, a place where she imagined she would not be sharing the same bed with three other siblings. she saw how hard her parents worked, and how the work would always leave you poor, no matter how much sweat it wrung out of you. eventually, she made her way to a town, about a hundred and fifty miles down the coast from where wang grew up, and got married. she and her husband had three teen-age children and both worked in her in-laws family business, a glove factory. she said that it had been nearly ten months since she had spoken to her family. she didnt want people at home to know what had happened to her, or for her children to be ashamed. some nine months earlier, su had travelled to toronto on a tourist visa, her first time outside china. shed recently discovered that her husband was having an affair with one of her colleagues, and felt that she had to get away. she also thought that, if she could find out about western universities, her children might be able to study at one. for a week, she stayed at a hostel in torontos chinatown. at a local bakery, she met a well-dressed, rich-looking woman, her hair in a fancy, movie-star bun, who turned out to be from her home province of guangdong. the woman, who called herself sister pingcoincidentally, the name of a famous human traffickersaid that there would be better opportunities for sus children in america. she offered to help her get there, set her up with a cleaning job, and sort out her accommodations and her immigration status. it seemed that su had stumbled on the ideal shu ren the kind of familiar person you rarely encountered outside china. the arrangement was that ping would charge three thousand dollars, which su could pay once she was earning money. they drove in a station wagon from toronto to new york, but the cleaning job didnt materialize. sister ping said that i owed her this sum and there was only one way to pay it back, su said. she was evasive when i asked about the scam. they just told us it would be o.k., she kept saying. i asked why she didnt turn in sister ping in exchange for a lighter sentence, and she said that she didnt know pings true identity or those of the other accomplices. it seemed that no oneneither the victims nor the perpetratorsreally knew one another. she went on, i know, i know, its a terrible thing that i did to those aunties. i have elderly folks back at home, too, so i know their pain. i wish i could take it back. when i ran the details by kevin hui, of the n.y.p.d., he said that the entire story was a fabrication, and that su had arrived in canada with a group of scammers. we knew they were looking for hits, he said. its a crew. thats what they do. the d.a.s office, likewise, doubted that any family su had in china would be ignorant of what she was doing. still, i wondered if sus fabrications might contain at least some fragments of truth. shen anqi, a legal scholar at teesside university, in the u.k., who has made a study of female chinese criminals, told me that the upbringing su described was typical of the women shed encountered. for her recent book,  offending women in contemporary china , shen interviewed dozens of child-traffickers and leaders of prostitution rings. the vast majority of them were born in the countryside to large familieschinas one-child policy never penetrated the rural hinterland. with only poor education, which left them unqualified for anything beyond manual labor, they were confronted with chinas rapid social change, rising inequality, and burgeoning materialism. the criminal market is easy to enter, requires no diploma, and provides a quick way for them to aspire to something much more than what they currently have, she said. im not justifying it, but the incentives are certainly there. shen noted that criminals like su tend to prey on people like themselves. they know what its like to be desperate and to fervently want something more through a quick fix, like a blessing, she said. its desperation chasing desperation. it occurred to me that, when su told wang that theyd been fated to meet, she was right, although not in the sense that she intended. the countrys vertiginous change, incomprehensible to both, had sparked in each a kind of magical thinking, a frantic hope that life could be transformed by a lucky break, and it was this that had brought them together. su told me that she was almost relieved to have been caught: i dont have to lie anymore. the pressures off. and, to an indigent chinese immigrant, the facilities at rikers didnt seem such a hardship. we live fifty women to a room, she said. theres time and space to exercise. life is orderly. the food is not bad at all. there was one officer in particular, a white woman, who checked in on her regularly. in all my months here, the lady prison guard, she was the first real american i get to know whos almost like a friend, su said. she raised her hand to brush a stray hair out of her eyes. on her middle finger, she wore a ring of gold and jade.

i became curious about the elements of the story that the scammers told wang, and of the ritual that they performed. a little research revealed that they had been patched together from various strands of traditional chinese belief. the white tiger has been a staple of chinese astrology since antiquity; it represents a thirst for blood and is thought to bring mortal danger to infants and pregnant women. the forty-nine days that wang was told to wait before opening the package echoed the forty-nine days that spirits of the recently dead must wait to be allocated their place in the afterlifea belief that entered chinese tradition, from india, in the fourth century b.c. the chant that she was told to recite was plausibly buddhist, and the granddaughters gesture during the blessing, arms raised heavenward, evoked daoist ritual. when i asked wang about the symbols, she was vague about their meaning and their origins. the white tiger is an ill omeneveryone knows this, she said. the exact significance of the symbols was less clear to her than the fact that they carried significance. jonathan h. x. lee, an associate professor of asian-american studies at san francisco state university, told me that this is common among contemporary chinese. its the ritual and symbol that have been passed down, he said. they carry import, even if their historical origins have been lost. he said that this was due, in part, to the syncretism of chinese beliefthe way that the indigenous religion of prehistoric china gradually blended with later traditions. traditional chinese religion revolved around veneration of the spirits of ones ancestors. daoism, which originated in china around the fourth century b.c., introduced practices of occult medicine and exorcism. buddhism, which was brought to china by indian missionaries around the first century a.d., added the idea of continuous rebirth and the retributive effects of karma. meanwhile, confucianisms emphasis on filial piety formalized ancestor worship as part of everyday life: ancestors who did not receive offerings of food and incense would become hungry and irritated in the netherworld. gods, ghosts, and ancestors are all connected in this world view, lee told me. gods are exceptional historical human beings or ancestors who have become deified. hungry ghosts are ancestors who have not been properly venerated. (many chinese communities annually celebrate the hungry ghost festival, in order to feed and placate these disruptive spirits.) in china, ghosts have been particularly integrated into social and administrative life. by the early twelfth century, daoist exorcism rites used judicial language to interrogate and sentence troublesome ghosts. the founder of the ming dynasty, the hongwu emperor, issued a proclamation, in 1375, stipulating that every county and village must have an altar for appeasing wandering ghosts, and that there should be one for every hundred households. as late as 1896, in a town in fujian, city bureaucrats presided over a ritual to drive out the hungry ghosts of people who had been killed while fighting japanese invaders in manchuria. in the early twentieth century, after the fall of the last imperial dynasty, traditional chinese religion came under attack from patriotic intellectuals like sun yat-sen, who thought it had impeded the countrys progress toward modernity. temples were demolished and statues smashed. in 1949, the communists established an atheist state and sought to purge the country of its superstitious ways. it is as if a raging tidal wave has swept away all the demons and ghosts, chairman mao said in 1955. by this time, ghost had been repurposed as a word for any malign influence, especially a counter-revolutionary one. nonetheless, in rural areas private domestic rituals to venerate ancestors or ward off ghosts were often tolerated. and, in 1982, deng xiaopings liberal reforms permitted religious gatherings to take place again. the idea was that it was just for old people, and, with time, it would die out, ian johnson, the author of the souls of china, a recent book on the resurgence of religious belief in the country, told me. religion didnt die out, but, as johnson explained, the decades of prohibition had eroded most peoples understanding of spiritual traditions. if you are of a certain generation and grew up in the communist state, you dont really know what real religion is in china, he said. lee, however, cautioned against viewing chinese religion as inherently vulnerable to blessing scams. he cited scandals involving christian televangelists and mentioned a case, earlier this year, in which a jamaican-american retiree was defrauded of her life savings by two people at a church in east flatbush, one of whom had posed as a pastor. ultimately, it seems, it was faith itself, rather than a specific cosmology, that made people susceptible to fraud. i spoke to barend ter haar, a scholar of chinese religion at oxford university, who made a further point: although, from a western perspective, some of these religious practices might seem exotic, they often fulfill functions that are easily recognizable. bereaved parents visiting a village shaman to arrange a ghost marriage for a deceased child might well experience a relief similar to that provided by grief counselling or psychoanalysis. ter haar told me, the point is that it gives the sufferer a sense of agency and an explanation that can be empowering.

early this year, su returned to court a number of times, and astonished everyone by refusing to take a plea deal, of between two and a half and four years in prison, that the prosecutors were offering. interiano, who was acting as counsel for the prosecution, wondered if she realized how slim her chances would be if she insisted on fighting her case. weve got video recordings, pictures, he said. this would be pretty close to a slam dunk. does your waitress have any identifying marks or tattoos? shamuil was exasperated with his client. this is the best deal shes going to get from the judge, he said. he speculated that su thought she could get less jail time by driving a hard bargain. probably in prison she heard about other chinese people in similar circumstances who got less time, he said, shrugging. rikers is a small place. all the chinese people know each other and talk. talking to su, id got the impression that she didnt fully understand the severity of her situation. it was as if the american judicial system were merely a nuisance that could be worked around, given enough perseverance. at one point, she said that, once her case was resolved, she wanted to return to the states to resume the college search for her children. finally, in mid-may, judge chun told shamuil, if the defendant doesnt take the plea, her sentence will certainly go up. i will be withdrawing the offer after today. after consulting with an interpreter, su took the deal, brows furrowed and eyes downcast. do you have anything to say? the judge asked her. im sorry, she said softly through the interpreter. i wont do it again. i went downstairs to talk to su, in the visiting area. she looked tired, with faintly bloodshot eyes and hair hastily tied in a ponytail. i asked her why it had taken her so long to plead. she didnt answer, but massaged her throat and swallowed with some difficulty. eventually, she said that the prison doctor had diagnosed a thyroid condition that required surgery. she had hoped to return to china for the operation. i told her that when many rich chinese people need surgery they pay to come to america. i would be too scared, she said. to be lying immobilized in a bed at a hospital deaf and mute, without knowing a single person? she used wangs term for a helpful contact: shu ren . su was now experiencing the same immigrant loneliness that had made wang susceptible to the scam.