at the age of sixty, spike lee has dropped a new joint from the autumn of his artbright and cool, with its themes self-consciously calling back across his body of work. shes gotta have it, a netflix series, revisits the premise of lees auspicious 1986 dbut. its ten-episode season arrived on thanksgiving, the holiday on which the heroine hosts her three male lovers for dinner, in both the source material and the tenth-episode epilogue to the show. because the new shes gotta have it is profuse with the fruits of lees ingenuity (and also with the ham and cheese that characterize his signature follies and habitual excesses), and because it spills over with the lessons that lee has harvested as an adman, video director, digital satirist, and celluloid romantic, it flows and overflows like a multimedia cornucopia.

the show is set in brooklyn, in the fall of 2016, after the death of old new york and so much else. the heroine, the twenty-seven-year old miss nola darling, is played by dewanda wise, an actor with eyes like honey and abundance in her heart. in 1986, nola was a collage artist, and her art was never really discussed, possibly because the character producing it was an attractive blank who, after declaring her rights to romantic and sexual autonomy, had not too much to say. the movie, with its economical elegance in depicting scenes inhabited by characters who were matter-of-factly black, was greeted on arrival as a landmark of independent film and a lodestar of african-american cinema, and its importance abides. but, still, it was beginners work, and sketchy.

in 2016, in keeping with nolas efflorescence into a full character, both lee and nola show her work, and the hustle to make it, more fully. nola paints unremarkable portraits with limited success, but she gains notoriety as a street artist after pasting her borough with posters directed against street harassment. both the graphic punch of the posters and the dialectical angles of the characters exchanges about art and power and gender and race and everything are functions of lees tabloid genius, which is attended, as usual, by his glad didacticism and forceful salesmanship. once or twice an episode, amid the rhythmic realism and soundstage patter of the dialogue, actors speak passages tonally resembling a duel between guests on a local public-affairs show. at such moments, i feel toward this shes gotta have it as one of its characters does toward her husband: after nolas father, stokely, delivers to nola a charismatic lecture of dubious content, her mother tells him, i love you, stokes, but you are really full of shit sometimes.

the original shes gotta have it, starring tracy camilla johns, begins, in the stark calm of ernest dickersons silver cinematography, with nola sitting up in bed in her fort greene apartment as if splashing up from under the covers like venus from the surf. instead of a headboard, nolas bedher loving bedfeatures a sort of secular altarpiece proliferating with scented candles. in 2016, nola rises like the sun and addresses the camera to begin a tour of her arc across the sky. the candles of the loving bed have been scaled back to be less of a fire hazard, but the bed remains the site of aestheticized athletic intimacies, mostly joyful. as before, lee elevates the love scenes beyond the art-house sexploitation gist of the show and movies premise and into semi-spiritual cinematic acts.

nola is seeing three men and a femme lesbian, and all four parts are revised, refurbished, and expanded from the 1986 version, plus adjusted for inflation. in the film, jamie overstreet is a single, middle-class guy in shirtsleeves, and his pedestrian respectability is bundled into nolas dickensian name; he first spots nola while waiting for the bus at fulton mall. in the series, jamie, played by lyriq bent, is a married man in a custom suit. this prince of finance introduces himself to nola on the brooklyn heights promenade, which is a short walk from his remsen street brownstone, a building i hereby appraise at nine and a half million dollars. we know that he and his wife are passing up rental income, because shes got him living in the basement.

the second of nolas three lovers is greer childs. a professional model in the original, greer has received a frictionless update. now hes a model who also takes photographs and whose comic narcissism is nimbly enabled by all the latest technological conveniences. the actor cleo anthony communicates greers camera lust and helpless self-infatuation in a way that renders his vanity magnetic. (the magnet repels the sympathies but attracts fascination.) the series improves on the scene in which greer, undressing for bed while nola watches, sours the striptease by fussily folding each piece of clothing he sheds. later in the season, struck that nola is heading to visit an ailing friend in the hospital, greer says, thats why i love youthat right there, how you care about people. it is as if we are witnessing his first exposure to compassion.

in 1986, lee played mars blackmona boyish hustler, a manic b-boy, a pipsqueak sneaker head with a huge yawp, a hype man forever in search of a crowd to work. he was instantly an archetype of sharp demotic talk and thus now also exists as a landmark of the fictional new york city landscape, like annie hall or lily bart or archie bunker or the real roxanne. as before, mars (now played by anthony ramos) lacks jamies wealth and greers biceps and instead offers a style of black masculinity that relies on verbal style and homeschooled bravado. mars lives at his sisters place in public housing and works for a fictional outfit called joey chainza coffee joint wrapped in a bicycle shop mixed up with symbols of gentrification. scenes set there encourage lee to shoot the jagged angles of bike frames to jazzy effect.

the first episode of the series follows the film somewhat closely. the fourth introduces opal gilstrap (ilfenesh hadera) and begins a considerable expansion of opals role in nolas life. the tenth episode, with the thanksgiving-dinner sequence, also follows the original, with the crucial difference that, in 1986, the dinner led to a hookup between jamie and nola that degenerated into a rape, an event that the movie failed to handle with any moral seriousness. lee disavowed the scene long ago, and the television series overwrites it, beginning with an early scene of nolas bruising escape from an assault perpetrated by a stranger on the sidewalk. the encounter motivates her work and informs an introspective quest, and each lovers response to the news of the assault complicates adjacent thoughts about love and commitment.

the show, in keeping with its constant attention to the theme of the hustle, places steady pressure on jamies biographyhis escape from an impoverished youth. at one point, in a wonderfully delirious digression, the series sprouts a gangster subplot; the rapper fat joe, who plays one of jamies old running buddies, laments that jamie has become a brooklyn heights gatsby: what the fuck happened to jay gatz from brownsville? lees bold-faced style of pop surrealism helps to put over such stuff, these essayistic fragments of fable. shes gotta have it hangs together by playing like a long-form music-video musical. at the close of this and other scenes, album covers relevant to the soundtrack flash on the screen for a beat, punctuating the flow of a digital picaresque.

in 2017, at the thanksgiving-dinner sequence, the camera circles the table as if godard is serving the meal, and the seasons plot sets itself aside with a cozy narrative convenience, allowing the season to wind down with a set piecea dance party scored to princes raspberry beret. its choreographed to be funky but wholesome, like a stroll on the soul train line. interested in the intersection of this song and this story line, at the site of lees sexual politics, i doubled back to girl 6 (1996), which stars theresa randle as an actress paying bills as a phone-sex operator.

girl 6 is popularly regarded as lees worst filmor at least it was, until she hate me arrived, in 2004but girl 6, with its script by suzan-lori parks , its small parts for madonna and naomi campbell, and its eerie examination of desire, ranks as a glamorous oddity. girl 6 is scored exclusively by prince, and it begins with raspberry beret playing as randle auditions for a part. she reads nola darlings introductory monologue from the original shes gotta have it, in which nola addresses the camera by saying, the only reason im consenting to this is because i wish to clear my name. in girl 6, randles character, nameless as an invisible woman, reads this speech while auditioning for a movie director played by quentin tarantino. he tells her to take her top off. she does. we watch. lee intends this is as a comment on sexism that is itself gratuitous. the critic greg tate wrote about this scene as lees umpteenth revision of irene caras fall from grace in famefor spike, female sexuality is just a step away from original sin. you can argue about the degree to which this befuddlement remains evident on the new shes gotta have it, and the show loves to argue, so its here for thatbut youll be arguing, which is what lee wants from you.