dee rees plays video games three or four hours a day, trying to crack their codes. one recent afternoon, the director, whose new film is the mud-spattered saga mudbound, opened a laptop in her downtown pied--terre. rejecting her buildings white-walls-only standard, shed painted one wall dark blue. she wore a gray sweatshirt and cats-eye glasses, had her hair pulled tight, and gave off an are you ready for this? vibe.

rees, who is forty, booted up west of loathing, a black-and-white stick-figure game set in the old west. i like games because the wins arent clean, necessarilytheres more than one way to do it, she said. and i like this one because its sarcastic. she helped select an avatar for her visitormabel mccoy the cow puncherthen explained, its a weird mix of wild west and sci-fi, where youre trying to gain muscle, mysticality, and moxie. had she beaten the game? yes, i figured out how to stop the demon cowherd from destroying the town.

when mabel freed a crow, rees approved: hell come back and help you later. when mabel lost most of her supply of meat in a poker game, rees frowned: fuck, dude! and when the game tried to warn mabel off exploring a spittoon by elaborating on its yuckiness (it smells like someone ran over a skunk, waited a week, and then set it on fire), she snickered. you have to explore everything, talk to everyone, and make the unexpected choice, she said. so, now, do you want to eat that dusty turnip?

mudbound, set in a racist mississippi in the nineteen-forties, is reess third feature. its about a black sharecropper family, the jacksons, and a white family, the mcallans, who own the farm that is slowly defeating them all. as laura mcallan (carey mulligan) yearns for her brother-in-law, jamie (garrett hedlund), he and ronsel jackson (jason mitchell), both veterans of the recent world war, strike up an unlikely friendship that has violent consequences. we didnt have the time or the money we needed, rees recalled. we had ten million when it should have been twenty, because i wanted the cast i wanted, not one that appealed to foreign-sales agents. in game terms, we had less gear than we needed, so it came down to relationshipsand lots of fucking moxie!

she opened her tablet to play device 6, which, she disclosed, was about nuclear weapons and bears. she quickly got stuck inside a kind of missile silo, facing a screaming goldilocks. vexed, she reminded herself, go slow, check everything, dont just push buttons!

with mudbound, she said, i wanted an old-school seven-reeler, a john ford film where the characters feel smaller than the place. the producers were all nervous: its too long!  the movie runs two hours and fourteen minutes. well, lauras whole meditation on country violence, with the dead possum and killing the mule, sets the tone in an ineffable way. shooting the lynching scene in the dilapidated barn near our setin rural louisianawould have been cheaper and faster, but i needed to find a two-tiered barn and put some bodies on the second level to give me a theatre of violence. she sighed. making a film is like a game, she said. you can beat it, but you dont know how you would have done it if youd gone a different way.

during the sundance film festival, netflix bought mudbound for twelve and a half million dollars. i was relieved, rees said, but i was also surprised that there wasnt a bidding war. we solved all the puzzlesand the door didnt open. the studios were thinking, oh, this is just a black film and we cant sell it. she continued, i dont want to sound whiny, but if youre only going to like mediocre stuff, then just say so.

shrugging, she turned to her tablet.  mudbound did pay off my student loans, so now im free as an artist, she said. i can say no. she toggled to another game, year walk, a snowy traipse through a nineteenth-century swedish forest. i like this oneits dark and obtuse, she said. deep in the woods, she came upon a spinning doll. she does this eerie little dance where her arms point out clues, rees said. humming quietly, she peered at some notes shed taken about the directions the doll pointed inl, b, l, r, and so onthat would help her find the way out. 