the two niggers, a man and a woman, cutting across the field are looking for a little moonshine when they spot the white boy, francis marion tarwaterthe teen-age antihero of flannery oconnors startling second novel, the violent bear it awaywho is digging a grave for his great-uncle mason. mason, a self-titled prophet who spent his life denouncing the world for having forsaken its saviour, believed that tarwater might have the calling, too, but the boy is not feeling his religion right now, standing in the dirt, just this side of death. oconnor writes: the woman, tall and indianlike, had on a green sun hat. she stooped under the fence without pausing and came on across the yard toward the grave; the man held the wire down and swung his leg over and followed at her elbow. they kept their eyes on the hole and stopped at the edge of it, looking down into the raw ground with shocked satisfied expressions. the man, buford, had a crinkled face, darker than his hat. old man passed, he said. the woman lifted her head and let out a slow sustained wail, piercing and formal. she . . . crossed her arms and then lifted them in the air and wailed again. tell her to shut up that, tarwater said. im in charge here now and i dont want no nigger-mourning. i seen his spirit for two nights, she said. seen him two nights and he was unrested. he aint been dead but since this morning, tarwater said. . . . hed been predicting his passing for many years, buford said. she seen him in her dream several nights and he wasnt rested. . . . poor sweet sugar boy, the woman said to tarwater, what you going to do here now by yourself in this lonesome place? published in 1960, the violent bear it away appeared just as martin luther king, jr., was cutting a large revolutionary swath through the old south, and only six years after brown v. board of education, when that little black girl in sunglasses had her face dotted with the spittle of her white countrymen in little rock. the south may indeed have seemed like a lonesome place to whites then. integration was not going slow, as william faulkner had said it should (to which thurgood marshall responded, they dont mean go slow, they mean dont go). and, in order to move into a modern south, whites would need to be less encumbered by the old ways: by manners, by the christian charity and moral rectitude of colored lifethe nigger-mourning that cut to the soul. race and faith and their attendant hierarchies and delusions are oconnors great themes. she has been hailed for her artistic and social independence, but readings of this american master often overlook the originality and honesty of her portrayal of southern whiteness. or, rather, southern whiteness as it chafed under its biggest cultural influencesouthern blackness. its remarkable to consider that oconnor started writing less than a hundred years after harriet beecher stowe published uncle toms cabin, and just a decade after margaret mitchells gone with the wind, two books whose imagined black worlds had more to do with their authors patronizing sentimentality than with the complicated intertwining of black and white, rich and poor, mundane and sublime which characterized real southern lifeand oconnors portrait of it. her black characters are not symbols defined in opposition to whiteness; they are the living people who were, physically at least, on the periphery of oconnors own world. she was not romantic enough to take faulkners dilsey view of blacksas the fulcrum of integrity and compassion. she didnt use them as vessels of sympathy or scorn; she simplyand complexlydrew from life.

flannery oconnors electric vision is still surprising enough, seventy-five years after her birth, to have inspired five new critical studies last year alonethe most compelling of which are richard giannones flannery oconnor, hermit novelist and lorine m. getzs flannery oconnor, literary theologian. yet there is no definitive biography, and one hesitates to read her fiction autobiographically, since the approach was not one that oconnor had much patience for. i know some folks that dont mind thier own bisnis, she wrote when she was twelve. eighteen years later, she elaborated, in a letter to a friend, explaining why she had no interest in representing herself in her writing: to say that any complete denudation of the writer occurs in the successful work is, according to me, a romantic exaggeration. a great part of the art of it is precisely in seeing that this does not happen. . . . everything has to be subordinated to a whole which is not you. any story i reveal myself completely in will be a bad story. from the beginning, oconnor worked to alchemize her background into something beyond mere anecdote and eccentricity. born in 1925, in savannah, georgia, she was baptized mary flannery oconnor at the catholic cathedral of st. john the baptist. the churchs sanctioning of mysticism would later have a profound influence on oconnors writing, but catholicism was a faith that had little sway in the christ-haunted south oconnor grew up ina place where jesus was god. savannah had been settled first by episcopalians and lutherans, then by baptists and methodists; catholics were excluded from the states charter until 1794, and were thereafter rarely regarded as anything but an itinerant non-reformed sect, as alien a presence as the jews. (that must be jew singing, someone scoffs when two catholic girls sing psalms, in the 1954 oconnor short story a temple of the holy ghost.) oconnor was the only child of regina cline and edward oconnor, a real-estate agent who aspired to be a writer. both parents were descended from irish catholic immigrants, and mary flannery began her studies at the st. vincents grammar school. even as a child, she had a merciless view of things, and her plain speech won her unwelcome attention from the sisters of mercy who provided her instruction. she grew up loving birds, and she favored chickens with mismatched eyes or crooked combs. when she was five, she raised a frizzled chicken (its feathers grew backward), which she taught to walk backward. a new york-based newsreel company that specialized in natural phenomena heard about the bird and sent a crew to oconnors home to film itan experience that marked me for life, she said later. the crews visit provided her with the first approval of her obsession with the grotesque as it lives beside the normal: a frizzled chicken striding backward in the yard while mother airs out a tablecloth and father closes the shed door, axe in one hand, wiping the sweat from the back of his neck with the other. american genius often feeds on its own environs, and oconnor was no exception. im pleased to live in baldwin county in the sovereign state of georgia, and to see what i can from here, she told one interviewer. she knew where her material was, and had known it since she was twelve. by then, she had discovered the tone of her voice, too, its lyrical flatness and its wildly leaping humor. (if i . . . tried to write a story about the japanese, the characters would all talk like herman talmadge, she once said.) oconnor was already slipping verse under her fathers napkin at the table and rejecting books that didnt satisfy her interest in the heretical. awful. i wouldnt read this book, she wrote in her copy of alice in wonderland. in a copy of georgina finds herself, by shirley watkins: this is the worst book i ever read next to pinnochio.  about her early reading, oconnor wrote to a friend, in 1955: the only good things i read when i was a child were the greek and roman myths which i got out of a set of a childs encyclopedia. . . . the rest of what i read was slop with a capital s. the slop period was followed by the edgar allan poe period which lasted for years and consisted chiefly in a volume called the humerous tales of e. a. poe. these were mighty humerousone about a young man who was too vain to wear his glasses and consequently married his grandmother by accident; another about a fine figure of a man who in his room removed wooden arms, wooden legs, hair piece, artificial teeth, voice box, etc. from the beginning of her reading life, oconnor preferred stories that were direct in their telling and mysterious only in their subtexts. she clearly despised the lack of clarity which she believed came with northern liberalism, and which she lampoons with her intellectual characters, who always function in a kind of godless oligarchy. in many of her stories, intellectuals are depicted as grumpy poseurs, mean and homely failures who cant get on with life and are often driven into the ground by its brutality. oconnor was like her chicken, walking backward, staring at others as she removed herself from them. in 1938, after edward oconnor was appointed a zone real-estate appraiser for the federal housing administration in atlanta, regina and flannery moved into the cline family house, in the nearby town of milledgeville, where edward could visit on the weekends. there was no parochial education for flannery in milledgeville, the home of the state insane asylum. (she eventually graduated from the experimental peabody high school.) and, soon after the move, edwards health began to deteriorate. he was suffering from lupus, a disease in which the body attacks its own tissues, destroying itself. fifteen years after her fathers death, in 1941, oconnor wrote to her friend elizabeth hester, a clerk at a credit bureau in atlanta, who was a frequent correspondent during the last nine years of oconnors life, and whose identity was only recently revealed: my father wanted to write but had not the time or money or training or any of the opportunities i have had. . . . anyway, whatever i do in the way of writing makes me extra happy in the thought that it is a fulfillment of what he wanted to do himself.

that fulfillment came relatively quickly. in 1945, shortly before completing her a.b. at the georgia state college for women, oconnor was admitted to the state university of iowa with a scholarship in journalism. oconnor had clear, pale skin, a heart-shaped face, lively eyes, and a thick georgia accent. in a letter to the editor robert giroux, paul engle, then the director of the iowa writers workshop, recalls meeting her that fall and being unable to understand her speech: embarrassed, i asked her to write down what she had just said on a pad. she wrote: my name is flannery oconnor. i am not a journalist. can i come to the writers workshop?  engle continued: like keats, who spoke cockney but wrote the purest sounds in english, flannery spoke a dialect beyond instant comprehension but on the page her prose was imaginative, tough, alive. . . . sitting at the back of the room silent, flannery was more of a presence than the exuberant talkers who serenade every writing-class with their loudness. oconnor rarely, if ever, discussed her bisnisher religion, her writing, her southernnesswith her peers in iowa. one classmate claims not to have realized that oconnor really did believe in evil and damnation and redemption, until she produced a story that showed insight into a characters fall. oconnors parochialism might have been a defense, the armor she used to shield herself from other people, but she also seemed to view it as someone elses problem; she knew who she was and where she was going. iowa, at least, provided her with a new perspective on the cryptic idea of home. at the end of her first semester at iowa, oconnor published her first story, the geranium, in accent . the story focusses on an enfeebled man named old dudley, who is living up north with his daughter and her family but wants to go back home to the south to die, near the niggers who are kinder to the old man than his own children. oconnor reworked the story several times after its first publication, but already, at twenty-one, she had found many of her mature themes: the skewering of tradition, the erosion of one world that, disastrously, comically, is the weak foundation of the next, and the spectacle of blacks and whites regarding each other across a divide of mutual outsiderness. oconnor was not a polemicist, but her work is implicitly political, given the environment she drew fromthe south during its second failed attempt at reconstruction, otherwise known as integration. as she wrote in an essay titled the regional writer, southern identity is not really connected with mocking birds and beaten biscuits and white columns any more than it is with hookworm and bare feet and muddy clay roads. indeed, she was at times violently critical of tennessee williamss and carson mccullerss work, because she felt that they played on clichd images of the region. an identity is not to be found on the surface, she wrote. oconnors vision of the postindustrial southwith its winn-dixie stores, its automobiles piled up in the junkyard of the lordas a modern version of the fall was all her own. but what fall? what loss of innocence? that of the slaves who became indentured servants and then niggers, and who dot her pages like flies? no: in oconnors fictional universe, the whites in power are the only ones who can afford to be innocent of their surroundings. oconnors most profound gift was her ability to describe impartially the bourgeoisie she was born into, to depict with humor and without judgment her rapidly crumbling social order. in revelation, a 1964 story, she describes mrs. turpin, a woman who occupies herself with the question of who she would have chosen to be if she couldnt have been herself: if jesus had said to her before he made her, theres only two places available for you. you can either be a nigger or white-trash, what would she have said? . . . she would have wiggled and squirmed and begged and pleaded but it would have been no use and finally she would have said, all right, make me a nigger thenbut that dont mean a trashy one. and he would have made her a neat clean respectable negro woman, herself but black. when mrs. turpin gets into a fight with a young white woman from wellesley, while sitting in a doctors waiting room, her sense of propriety is upset; meaninglessness yawns before her like a great black hole. oconnor allows us to see what mrs. turpins pride hides from her: how the blacks who work for her condescend to her, how they hide their intelligence so that she wont be tempted to interfere in their lives. one of them asks mrs. turpin about the bruise she incurred during the fight and, before she can explain, continues, aint nothing bad happen to you! you just had you a little fallas if they all knew that mrs. turpin is protected in some special way by divine providence. mrs. turpin describes the scene in the doctors office: she said . . . something real ugly, she muttered. she sho shouldnt said nothin ugly to you, the old woman said. you so sweet. you the sweetest lady i know. she pretty too, the one with the hat on said. and stout, the other one said. i never knowed no sweeter white lady. thats the truth befo jesus, the old woman said. amen! you des as sweet and pretty as you can be. mrs. turpin knew exactly how much negro flattery was worth and it added to her rage. she said, she began again and finished this time with a fierce rush of breath, that i was an old wart hog from hell. there was an astounded silence. where she at? the youngest woman cried in a piercing voice. lemme see her. ill kill her! ill kill her with you! the other one cried. she blong in the sylum, the old woman said emphatically. you the sweetest white lady i know. she pretty too, the other two said. stout as she can be and sweet. jesus satisfied with her! jesus is, perhaps, not as satisfied as mrs. turpin. no reader can help but be amused and disturbed by this passage, which is representative of oconnors subtle observation of a world that was not her own, but which informed every inch of the one she inhabited. blacks may have spent much of their lives on the margins, but she understood the ways in which they entered the circle. the theatrical modesty and duplicity exhibited by these blacks who are an audience for mrs. turpins troublesdespite the fact that she will never be one for theirsare all just a part of the southern code of manners. oconnor delighted in portraying the forms of domestic terrorism. it is a catholic tenet that god judges by actions, but virtually all her white women characters judge by appearances. oconnor greatly admired faulkner. nobody wants his mule and wagon stalled on the same track the dixie limited is roaring down, she remarked of southern writers relationship to the master. but there is no faulknerian snopes in oconnors fiction. what she describes is far more evil: the nice lady on the bus who calls you nigger by offering your child a penny; or the old woman who loves to regale her grandchildren with stories about the pickaninnies of her antebellum youth. these are women who wouldnt know grace if it slapped them in the facewhich it often does. and why would any black person want to belong to the world that these women and their men have created? for oconnor, writing about integration was a way of exposing the dangers of clinging to the fiction of power. but, like faulkner, oconnor herself had difficulty assimilating the push toward integration which took the region so suddenly and violently in the fifties and sixties. she clung to the provincialism she satirized, and she was sometimes clumsy at conveying real life among blacks beyond her own circlestheir class distinctions, their communication with one another apart from whites. the one false note in the displaced person (1955), for instance, comes when two black workers discussing the woman they work for fall into a kind of rural amos n andy routine:  big belly act like she know everything. never mind . . . your place too low for anybody to dispute with you for it.  a curtain falls over oconnors insightand her ear for speech. luckily, she rarely tried to cover this groundprobably a prudent decision, given the murky and not altogether constructive works of some of the white liberals who did.

oconnor received her m.f.a. in june of 1947, and engle arranged for a fellowship that allowed her to stay at iowa for another year and begin work on her unsettling first novel, wise blood. hazel motes, oconnors evangelical hero, wears a blue suit and a black hat and has white skin that crackles like pork rind in the hot southern sun. he may look like a standard preacher, but hes not like any the good citizens of his adopted town, taulkinham, have ever heard of. an itinerant prophet, he believes only in his own church, the church without christ . . . where the blind dont see and the lame dont walk and whats dead stays that way. motes is a backward innocent, raised a baptist, who, instead of accepting christ into his life, decides to be him. by denying jesus, he turns his back on those who came before him, and who no doubt learned much of their discourse from the black preachers whose rhetoric soaks the southern soil. but motes has a grudge against jesus: he equates him with sin, or more specifically with the sins that he himself has committed and cannot escapenot in the eyes of his relatives, rotten with fake piety, who believe that only the lord can wash him clean and are no better than niggers who think that the lord will make them white. of wise blood, the writer and critic stanley edgar hyman said, whatever caused miss oconnor to choose protestant fundamentalism as her metaphor for catholic vision, it was a brilliant choice. . . . it freed her from the constraints of good taste. oconnors humor lay in such paradoxesin being an alienated catholic in a world of bible-thumpers, a single girl in a society of matrons. it becomes more and more difficult in america to make belief believable, but in this the southern writer has the greatest possible advantage. he lives in the bible belt, she wrote, and went on: the catholic novelist in the south is forced to follow the spirit into strange places and to recognize it in many forms not totally congenial to him. . . . i think he will feel a good deal more kinship with backwoods prophets and shouting fundamentalists than he will with those politer elements for whom the supernatural is an embarrassment and for whom religion has become a department of sociology or culture of personality development. his interest and sympathy may very well goas i know my own doesdirectly to those aspects of southern life where the religious feeling is most intense and where its outward forms are farthest from the catholic. . . . the result of these underground religious affinities will be a strange and, to many, perverse fiction, one which . . . gives us no picture of catholic life, or the religious experiences that are usual with us, but i believe that it will be catholic fiction. in 1948, she was accepted at yaddo as a writer-in-residence. there she was championed by several other writers: alfred kazin, robert lowell, and lowells wife-to-be, elizabeth hardwick, who once described oconnor as being like some quiet puritanical convent girl from the harsh provinces of canada. although philip rahv eventually published oconnors work in the partisan review , she first began to attract attention in the sewanee review and, through the southern agrarian john crowe ransom, in the kenyon review. with the exception of kazin, virtually none of oconnors early supporters were jewish, and oconnor had little exposure to european immigrants, to intellectual debate as a form of socializing, or to agnosticism. the north was still a black-and-white world, though in a different way than shed experienced it at home. the following year, oconnor secured a contract for wise blood, with holt, rinehart. the association was not a happy one. she wrote to paul engle, describing the experience: i learned indirectly that nobody at rinehart liked the 108 pages . . . that the ladies there particularly had thought it unpleasant (which pleased me). i told selby [oconnors editor] that i was willing enough to listen to rinehart criticism but that if it didnt suit me, i would disregard it. . . . to develope at all as a writer i have to develope in my own way. . . . i will not be hurried or directed by rinehart. i think they are interested in the conventional and i have had no indication that they are very bright. . . . if they dont feel i am worth giving more money to and leaving alone, then they should let me go. . . . selby and i came to the conclusion that i was prematurely arrogant. i supplied him with the phrase. it is incredible to read, in this age, a letter by a writer whose use of ego serves to protect, not inform, her work. oconnor was soon released from her contract and, in 1950, signed with robert giroux, then at harcourt, brace, whom she had met through robert lowell. the year before, lowell had also introduced her to the catholic poet and translator robert fitzgerald and his wife, sally. the young couple had children, and a home in ridgefield, connecticut; they needed a boarder to make ends meet, and oconnor moved in that fall. oconnor attended mass daily with the fitzgeralds. and, as her literary mastery deepened, she became better able to define her faith. she wrote to elizabeth hester: i am a catholic peculiarly possessed of the modern consciousness, that thing jung describes as unhistorical, solitary, and guilty. to possess this within the church is to bear a burden, the necessary burden for the conscious catholic. as w. h. auden put it, in 1912, it was a real vision to discover that god loves a pernod and a good fuck, but in 1942 every maiden aunt knows this and its time to discover something else he loves. unlike the majority of catholics the fitzgeralds had known, oconnor lived her faith. in a memoir about her, robert fitzgerald wrote admiringly of her inability to speak in abstractions: she could make things fiercely plain. as in her comment, now legendary, on an interesting discussion of the eucharist symbol: if its a symbol, to hell with it.  this most psychologically astute and least psychological of writers watched the action unfold in her stories and novels with a kind of amateur glee. as someone whose world view was in part ecclesiastical, oconnor also knew that having faith involved hard, often dispassionate work: you did not embrace the leper at the side of the road because you identified with him; in fact, because wasnt even part of the equation. seeing his skin drop off in flakes and handing over a fiver to sustain him were actions that called for description, not explanation. oconnor understood comedy as the flashy side of tragedy. in her work, disaster puts on a red shirt and acts the fool for the devils amusement.