three dear friends had thanksgiving babies, and i was thinking of them all last night. one was born a month early, five pounds and elfin, in san francisco; she went home with her parents and two older siblings, to ojai, a week or so ago. the second, a long-awaited second child, lives just north of sunset, in brentwood. and the third, a first child, is in tujunga, in the san fernando valley. a few days ago, my friends in ojai fled sixty miles north, as the ninety-thousand-acre thomas fire threatened their home and the quaint downtown was being evacuated by means of vintage trolleys . yesterday morning, as soot and ash from the newly broken-out skirball fire swirled through brentwood and settled in my friends house, they left, too. the friends with the newborn in tujunga, improbably, stayed, in spite of a mandatory-evacuation order owing to the encroachment of the creek fire . their bags were packed, but they reported that the sky was blue.

the skirball fire started early on wednesday morning in the brush on the hillside next to the 405, at the exit for mulholland drive, opposite the getty center and its treasures. marysol velamoor, a friend who lives near there, in bel air, was awakened by a panicked text from her cousin. she spent the next twenty minutes pacing, while her two boys slept. her husband, sri, was on a business trip, to minneapolis. was she overreacting? if so, they could have a laugh about it later. she shoved some clothing in a suitcase, packed the framed impressions of her childrens handprints, their passports, birth certificates, computers, a hard drive, and four yogurts from her fridge. she put on sneakers and her best earrings. then came the mandatory-evacuation notice. she woke the kids up and told them they were going to have an adventureno school! they drove south, avoiding news on the radio, part of a forty-six-thousand-person exodus from bel air.

a little while later, marysol and the kids arrived at my door, in venice, out of the burn zone, where the air was somewhat clear, and the cars and leaves had only a fine tawny layer of dust, rather than black ash. (even in venice, though, the place to which many were evacuating, the air smelled so specifically unhealthy that my husband, leaving the house in the morning, was transported to lower manhattan just after 9/11, and started to tear up with emotion.) my children were home, too: schools were cancelled or let out early all around the region.

marysol and i sent the kids to the playroom to watch televisionas much as they wanted todayand sat at the kitchen table drinking coffee. i thought this is what happened to other people, she said. she drew me a map on a piece of paper towel: the raging fire, her street, and the dry-brush-filled canyon between them. shed seen on her phone that a defensive line of fire trucks was positioned on casiano road, at the top of the opposite side of the canyon. she seemed calm but couldnt eat. packing for the unknown, she said, had been oddly liberating: she neither had nor needed many possessions. her children, who have severe asthma, were safe. she felt lucky.

after a while, i went to the playroom to turn on another cartoon. when i rentered the kitchen, marysol said in a low voice, its on casiano. theyre saying six houses are on fire. she looked stricken. now i have to start believing all the things ive been saying all morning. rupert murdochs vineyard estate, moraga, was burning. i stuck my head out the back door and noticed that the air had started to stink, like old broccoli and charred wires.

sri landed at lax and came straight to our house. he hugged his children tenderly, and then the three adults returned to our huddle in the kitchen. he pulled out his phone, and we watched cnn for a few minutes. houses that they can see from their back yard were on fire. imagine you were watching your house burn on television right now, the cnn announcer said. sri, a stalwart, not easily fazed, gave me a grim, ironic look. see that? he said, pointing at the screen. white smoke. thats good. thats what youre supposed to look for.

when are we going home? their older son asked from the other room. the day was starting to feel long; they wanted baths and their own beds. marysol and sri decided to go to a hotel that night, promising the boys movies and treats. we gave them a hardy boys bookadventure!and a jacket, which theyd forgotten. before they left, sri checked his phone one more time, looking at an animated graphic of the wind direction that was predicted for the night: away from their house.

at the end of the day, i texted a friend who, wanting to avoid a middle-of-the-night move if the wind shifted, had cleared her family out of beverly hills. their house sits high on the hillside, touching wilderness. hard day, she texted back. car full of jewels and photo albums. at least one family she knew from school had lost their home. she was at shutters on the beach, a luxury hotel in santa monica, which was full of people fleeing the fire and the bad air (dave chappelle, norman lear). in the dining room that night, she told me, all the emergency alerts had gone off at once, three blares accompanied by a message that the night would bring strong winds and extreme danger, and the admonition stay alert. listen to authorities.