the writer david foster wallace committed suicide on september 12th of last year. his wife, karen green, came home to find that he had hanged himself on the patio of their house, in claremont, california. for many months, wallace had been in a deep depression. the condition had first been diagnosed when he was an undergraduate at amherst college, in the early eighties; ever since, he had taken medication to manage its symptoms. during this time, he produced two long novels, three collections of short stories, two books of essays and reporting, and everything and more, a history of infinity. depression often figured in his work. in the depressed person, a short story about an unhappy narcissistic young womanincluded in wallaces 1999 collection, brief interviews with hideous menhe wrote, paxil, zoloft, prozac, tofranil, wellbutrin, elavil, metrazol in combination with unilateral ect (during a two-week voluntary in-patient course of treatment at a regional mood disorders clinic), parnate both with and without lithium salts, nardil both with and without xanax. none had delivered any significant relief from the pain and feelings of emotional isolation that rendered the depressed persons every waking hour an indescribable hell on earth. he never published a word about his own mental illness. wallaces death was followed by four public memorial services, celebrations of his work in newspapers and magazines, and tributes on the web. he was only forty-six when he killed himself, which helped explain the sense of loss readers and critics felt. there was also wallaces outsized passion for the printed word at a time when it looked like it needed champions. his novels were overstuffed with facts, humor, digressions, silence, and sadness. he conjured the world in two-hundred-word sentences that mixed formal diction and street slang, technicalese and plain speech; his prose slid forward with a controlled lack of control that mimed thought itself. what goes on inside is just too fast and huge and all interconnected for words to do more than barely sketch the outlines of at most one tiny little part of it at any given instant, he wrote in good old neon, a story from 2001. riffs that did not fit into his narrative he sent to footnotes and endnotes, which he liked, he once said, because they were almost like having a second voice in your head. the sadness over wallaces death was also connected to a feeling that, for all his outpouring of words, he died with his work incomplete. wallace, at least, never felt that he had hit his target. his goal had been to show readers how to live a fulfilled, meaningful life. fictions about what it is to be a fucking human being, he once said. good writing should help readers to become less alone inside. wallaces desire to write morally passionate, passionately moral fiction, as he put it in a 1996 essay on dostoyevsky, presented him with a number of problems. for one thing, he did not feel comfortable with any of the dominant literary styles. he could not be a realist. the approach was too familiar and anesthetic, he once explained. anything comforting put him on guard. it seems important to find ways of reminding ourselves that most familiarity is mediated and delusive, he said in a long 1991 interview with larry mccaffery, an english professor at san diego state. the default for wallace would have been ironythe prevailing tone of his generation. but, as wallace saw it, irony could critique but it couldnt nourish or redeem. he told mccaffery, look, man, wed probably most of us agree that these are dark times, and stupid ones, but do we need fiction that does nothing but dramatize how dark and stupid everything is? so wallaces project required him to invent a language and a stance of his own. i want to author things that both restructure worlds and make living people feel stuff, he wrote to his editor michael pietsch while he was working on his second novel, infinite jest, which little, brown published in 1996. he knew that such proclamations made him seem a holy fool. in the interview with mccaffery, he said, it seems like the big distinction between good art and so-so art lies . . . in be[ing] willing to sort of die in order to move the reader, somehow. even now im scared about how sappy thisll look in print, saying this. and the effort to actually to do it, not just talk about it, requires a kind of courage i dont seem to have yet. he also said, all the attention and engagement and work you need to get from the reader cant be for your benefit; its got to be for hers. one of the great pleasures in reading wallace is to watch him struggle to give the reader her due. his first novel, the broom of the system, published in 1987, tells of a young woman who worries that she might exist only as a character in a story. the book suggests that the world should not be taken too seriously: life is an intellectual game, and words are the pieces on the board. the problem for wallace, as he reflected after its publication, was that broom offered an analysis but derided even the idea of a solution. in a 1989 letter to the novelist jonathan franzen, a friend, wallace said that broom felt as if it had been written by a very smart fourteen-year-old. infinite jest, which came out almost a decade after broom, was a vast investigation into america as the land of addictions: to television, to drugs, to loneliness. the book comes to center on a halfway-house supervisor named don gately, a member of alcoholics anonymous, who, with great effort, resists these enticements. whats unendurable is what his own head could make of it all, gately thinks near the end. but he could choose not to listen. through the example of gately, infinite jest offered readers an oblique form of counsel, but wallace had mixed feelings about the book. the critic james wood cited infinite jest as representative of the kind of fiction dedicated to the pursuit of vitality at all costs. at times, wallace felt the same way. im sad and empty as i always am, when i finish something long, wallace wrote to franzen, shortly before the books publication. i dont think its very goodsome clipping called a published excerpt feverish and not entirely satisfying, which goes a long way toward describing the experience of writing the thing. wallace began to doubt the aspect of his work that many readers admired most: his self-consciously maximalist style. he was known for endlessly fracturing narratives and for stem-winding sentences adorned with footnotes that were themselves stem-winders. such techniques originally had been his way of reclaiming language from banality, while at the same time representing all the caveats, micro-thoughts, meta-moments, and other flickers of his hyperactive mind. wallaces approach reminded the reader that what he was reading was inventedthe final work of constructing a moral world was his. but after infinite jest wallace came to feel that his prose was too often arch and arid. without capitulating to realism, he wanted to tell his stories in a more straightforward way. from 1997 on, wallace worked on a third novel, which he never finishedthe long thing, as he referred to it with michael pietsch. his drafts, which his wife found in their garage after his death, amount to several hundred thousand words, and tell of a group of employees at an internal revenue service center in illinois, and how they deal with the tediousness of their work. the partial manuscriptwhich little, brown plans to publish next yearexpands on the virtues of mindfulness and sustained concentration. properly handled, boredom can be an antidote to our national dependence on entertainment, the book suggests. as wallace noted at a 2005 commencement speech at kenyon college, true freedom means being conscious and aware enough to choose what you pay attention to and to choose how you construct meaning from experience. because if you cannot exercise this kind of choice in adult life, you will be totally hosed. by then, wallace had become convinced that the literary contortions for which he was known had become an impediment to this message. franzen says of wallace, there was a certain kind of effulgent writing that he just wasnt interested in doing anymore. in the new novel, a character comments, maybe dullness is associated with psychic pain, because something thats dull or opaque fails to provide enough stimulation to distract people from some other, deeper type of pain that is always there, if only in an ambient low-level way, and which most of us spend nearly all our time and energy trying to distract ourselves from. wallace was trying to write differently, but the path was not evident to him. i think he didnt want to do the old tricks people expected of him, karen green, his wife, says. but he had no idea what the new tricks would be. the problem went beyond technique. the central issue for wallace remained, as he told mccaffery, how to give cpr to those elements of whats human and magical that still live and glow despite the times darkness. he added, really good fiction could have as dark a worldview as it wished, but itd find a way both to depict this world and to illuminate the possibilities for being alive and human in it. in the late eighties, doctors had prescribed nardil for wallaces depression. nardil, an antidepressant developed in the late fifties, is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor that is rarely given for long periods of time, because of its side effects, which include low blood pressure and bloating. nardil can also interact badly with many foods. one day in the spring of 2007, when wallace was feeling stymied by the long thing, he ate at a persian restaurant in claremont, and afterward he went home ill. a doctor thought that nardil might be responsible. for some time, wallace had come to suspect that the drug was also interfering with his creative evolution. he worried that it muted his emotions, blocking the leap he was trying to make as a writer. he thought that removing the scrim of nardil might help him see a way out of his creative impasse. of course, as he recognized even then, maybe the drug wasnt the problem; maybe he simply was distant, or maybe boredom was too hard a subject. he wondered if the novel was the right medium for what he was trying to say, and worried that he had lost the passion necessary to complete it. that summer, wallace went off the antidepressant. he hoped to be as drug free as don gately, and as calm. wallace would finish the long thing with a clean brain. he entered this new period of life with what franzen calls a sense of optimism and a sense of terrible fear. he hoped to be a different person and a different writer. thats what created the tension, franzen recalls. and he didnt make it.

david wallace was born in 1962, in ithaca, new york. his father, james, was a graduate student in philosophy. when david was three, his father took a job at the university of illinois, in urbana. his mother, sally, was an english teacher. wallace and his sister, amy, who was two years younger, grew up in a home with language at its center. on a car trip when david was four, the family agreed to substitute 3.14159 for every mention of the word pie in their conversation. if there was no word for a thing, sally wallace invented it: greebles meant little bits of lint, especially those which feet brought into bed; twanger was the word for something whose name you dont know or cant remember. you know, we actually only ever use two per cent of our fat asses. wallace was encouraged and pushed by his parents. this was the kind of family where the mother would bring home the encyclopdia britannica for the family to read through, the novelist mark costello, who roomed with wallace at amherst, says. when wallace was twelve, he was one of two winners of a local poetry contest. did you know that rats breed there? / that garbage is their favorite lair, david wrote of a polluted creek nearby. he used the fifty-dollar prize to help pay for tennis camp. he was an awkward child but competitive, and he became a very good tennis player, ranked in the junior midwest division. one summer, he taught children in the urbana parks program. the penalty for botching shots was that wallace would recount chapters from his life. they were all made up. his family and teachers realized that david was exceptional. he was just going to hoover everything, his mother said. but he was soon struggling with mental and emotional difficulties. in his senior year of high school, he began carrying a towel around with him to wipe away the perspiration from anxiety attacks, and a tennis racquet, so that no one commented on the towel. he was purposely hiding the attacks, i think, his father says. he was very ashamed of it. during this time, david applied to amherst, where his father had gone, and was accepted. before wallace left for college, he took a long walk through the cornfields, to say goodbye to the midwest. at amherst, he was soon drawn to math and philosophy. he relished the special sort of buzz that they provided, as he later told mccaffery: these moments appeared in proof-completions, or maybe algorithms. or like a gorgeously simple solution to a problem you suddenly see after half a notebook with gnarly attempted solutions. wallace joined the debate and glee clubs, and smoked a lot of pot with friends. one day, though, toward the end of his sophomore year, costello walked into their dorm room to find wallace sitting alone, slumped over, his gray samsonite suitcase between his legs, a chicago bears cap on his head. i have to go home, he told costello. somethings wrong with me. his family was surprised by his return. we didnt press him, his mother says. we figured if he wanted to talk about it hed talk about it. for a short time, he drove a school bus. he also found a psychiatrist and began taking antidepressants. during this time, he traced his breakdown to his not really wanting to be a philosopher. i had kind of a midlife crisis at twenty, which probably doesnt augur well for my longevity, he later told mccaffery. he began to write fiction. until then, wallace had seen novels primarily as a pleasurable way to get information. (even in later years, he admired the novels of tom clancy for their ability to pack in facts.) but he realized that fiction could order experience as well as philosophy could, and also provide some of the same comfort. during this time, he wrote several short stories, one of which was published. the planet trillaphon appeared in the amherst review in 1984. the autobiographical story captures the intense pain of the depression he suffered: im not incredibly glib, but ill tell what i think the bad thing is like. . . . imagine that every single atom in every single cell in your body is sick . . . intolerably sick. and every proton and neutron in every atom . . . swollen and throbbing, off-color, sick, with just no chance of throwing up to relieve the feeling. every electron is sick, here, twirling offbalance and all erratic in these funhouse orbitals that are just thick and swirling with mottled yellow and purple poison gases, everything off balance and woozy. quarks and neutrinos out of their minds and bouncing sick all over the place. when he returned to school, wallace took his first creative-writing class, and began aggressively reading contemporary fiction. he was drawn to the postmodernists, whose affection for puzzles and mirrors-within-mirrors sensibility reflected his own enthusiasm for math and philosophy. costello remembers, junior year, david and i were sitting around talking about magical realistsi think it was one hundred years of solitudeand someone said, pynchons much cooler. we said who? he threw a copy of lot 49 at us. for dave, that was like bob dylan finding woody guthrie. wallace also loved don delillos white noise, which came out when he was a senior. that same year, wallace began his novel the broom of the system. a remark from an old girlfriend had stuck in his mind. he later wrote to gerald howard, the books editor, that she said that she would rather be a character in a piece of fiction than a real person. i got to wondering just what the difference was. wallace wrote most of the nearly five hundred pages of broom during the second semester. he took his deadpan dialogue from delillo and his character names and attitude of paranoia from pynchon. his protagonist is lenore stonecipher beadsman; her boyfriend is rick vigorous, an amherst graduate and the director of the publishing firm frequent & vigorous. beadsmans great-grandmother, a disciple of wittgenstein, has mysteriously disappeared from her nursing home. the atmosphere of ontological uncertainty that pervades the book is wallaces dramatization of the ideas of wittgenstein. yet there was a tumble and urgency to his writing that broke free of this philosophical anchor. rick vigorous thinks about lenores great-grandmother: apparently she was some sort of phenomenon in college and won a place in graduate study at cambridge . . . but in any event there she studied . . . under a mad crackpot . . . who believed that everything was words. really. if your car would not start, it was apparently to be understood as a language problem. if you were unable to love, you were lost in language. being constipated equaled being clogged with linguistic sediment. in september, 1985, wallace mailed a chapter of broom to a literary agency in san francisco. in a cover letter, he noted coyly that he was roughly the same age as bret easton ellis and david leavittwhose fiction has done well partly because of readers understandable interest in new, young writing. a new associate at the agency, bonnie nadell, loved the chapter, and took wallace on as her first client. three months later, she sold the manuscript to gerald howard, of penguin books, which had started a line of contemporary novels in paperback. in a letter to howard, wallace explained that broom wasnt realistic, and it is not metafiction; if its anything, its meta-the-difference-between-the-two. in the mccaffery interview, he described broom as covert autobiography, the sensitive tale of a sensitive young wasp whos just had this midlife crisis thats moved him from coldly cerebral analytic math to a coldly cerebral take on fiction . . . which also shifted his existential dread from a fear that he was just a 98.6f calculating machine to a fear that he was nothing but a linguistic construct. the editing went smoothly. in a letter to howard, wallace had promised to be neurotic and obsessive but not too intransigent or defensive. but they disagreed on how broom should end. howard felt that the text called for some sort of resolution; wallace did not think so. howard urged him to keep in mind the physics of readingor, as wallace came to understand the phrase, a whole set of readers values and tolerances and capacities and patience-levels to take into account when the gritty business of writing stuff for others to read is undertaken. in other words, a reader who got through a long novel like broom deserved a satisfying ending. wallace was not so confident a writer as to simply ignore howards suggestion; as he wrote to howard, he didnt want his novel to be like kafkas investigations of a dog . . . ayn rand or late gnter grass, or pynchon at his rare worstbooks that gave pleasure only to their authors. yet when he tried to write a proper conclusion, in which geriatrics emerge, revelations revelationize, things are cleared up, the words felt wrong to him. i am young and confused and obsessed with certain problems that i think right now distill the experience of being human, he wrote to howard. reality was fragmented, and so his book must be, too. in the end, he broke the novel off midsentence: im a man of my howard was won over by wallaces ending, and felt that broom was remarkable, a portent for the future of american fiction. he says, it wasnt just a style but a feeling he was expressing, one of playful exuberance . . . tinged with a self-conscious self-consciousness. the dominant style of the time was the minimalism of writers such as raymond carver and ann beattie. bret easton ellis and jay mcinerneychroniclers of disaffected youthwere an offshoot of this group. these writers were smart but withholding, their characters often bored with being bored. wallaces voice was different. it projected, in howards words, the sheer joy of a talent realizing itself. there was optimism in its despair, elation in its anomie. broom received varied reviews. caryn james, in the times , called the book a manic human flawed extravaganza, and said that it reminded her of pynchons v. but where james saw homage others saw derivativeness. they thought that wallace was too eager to show how smart he was. they disliked the lack of an ending. each negative review surprised and hurt wallace. after reading a review from publishers weekly , wallace wrote howard, the guy seemed downright angry at having been made to read the thing. yet broom found an audience, selling almost twenty thousand paperback copies in its first year. moreover, the book showed other writers that there was a space between the taut hermeticism of the minimalists and the postmodern trickery of john barth and robert coover, whose main interest was in uncovering the struts and bolts of narrative fiction. from broom would come a new strain of meta-the-difference writingbooks such as dave eggerss a heartbreaking work of staggering genius and zadie smiths white teeth.

broom was published while wallace was in the second year of an m.f.a. program at the university of arizona. whereas he had once dressed like a midwestern square, he now grew his hair long and wrapped his head in a bandanna. at arizona, where realists dominated the faculty, wallace found himself and his style unpopular. the day after he handed out copies of broom, he was upset to find one at the secondhand bookstore. all the same, he wrote easily, quickly finishing many of the stories for his first collection, girl with curious hair (1989). the stories were more narrowly postmodern than broom, concerned with reality and the distorting effects of television and movies. my appearance was about an actress who was nervous about going on david lettermans show. westward the course of empire takes its way was a parodic homage to john barths story lost in the funhouse. wallace came to feel that his professors at arizona had been rightthe stories were brittle and irritatingly clever. but at the time he was happy with them, and caught up in the pleasure of artistic creation. writing fiction takes me out of time, he said in his first interview, in arrival , published when he was in tucson. thats probably as close to immortal as well ever get. in the summer of 1987, wallace finished his m.f.a. and moved into an apartment on the edge of tucson. his mood worsened. curious hair was largely done, and he did not know what was next. i think he was always afraid that the last thing he wrote would be the last thing he wrote, amy wallace, who is now a public defender, says. in late 1987, wallace took a temporary job teaching creative writing at amherst. he wrote to bonnie nadell that he was drinking a lot and, like rick vigorous, wandering around the campus remembering disasters. he returned to tucson; one day, he called home and said he was thinking of hurting himself. his mother flew to tucson and helped him close up his apartment. they rented a u-haul and took turns driving and reading aloud a dean koontz novel during the sixteen-hundred-mile trip home. these new regulations will fundamentally change the way we get around them. back in urbana, wallace felt like a failure. a lot of the trouble has to do with writing, but none of it with having stuff to send you, publications, or careers, he wrote to nadell. nothing to do, really, with anything exterior to me. in another letter, he wrote, my ambitions at this point are modest and mostly surround staying alive. one night, he and amy watched the karen carpenter story, a maudlin tv movie about the singer, who died of a heart attack brought on by anorexia. when it was over, wallaces sister, who was working on her own m.f.a., at the university of virginia, told david that she had to drive back to virginia. david asked her not to go. after she went, he tried to commit suicide with pills. he survived, and checked himself in to a psychiatric ward in urbana, where he was given a course of electroconvulsive therapy. the experience horrified him, but he thought it helped. wallaces mother remembers that david emerged as delicate as a child. he would ask, how do you make small talk?  his mother remembers.  how can you know which frying pan to pick out of the cupboard?  wallace had decided that writing was not worth the risk to his mental health. he applied and was accepted as a graduate student in philosophy at harvard. philosophy was the only thing that had meant as much to him as writing. it, too, could trigger epiphanies. harvard had offered him a scholarship, and academia would give him a more stable life, with health insurance. at the time, mark costello was beginning a job as a lawyer in boston. wallace suggested that they rent an apartment together. in the spring of 1989, they moved into a dilapidated house in somerville. boston is fun, wallace wrote to nadell in may, 1989, inviting her to visit. well have laughs, listen to rap and james brown. he was rebelling against the expectations that people had of him, drinking heavily and smoking a lot of marijuana. girl with curious hair came out in august, 1989, to mixed reviews and little attention. wallace was heartbroken. he thought hed written a better book than broom, and then the publication was this big fat zero, nadell recalls. and when wallace began his studies at harvard that fall, he was immediately disappointed. the students did their professors laundry and clustered around them, and he thought that was just ridiculous, james wallace remembers. he was a published author and expected to be treated as an equal. about a year after he had his breakdown in tucson, wallace called costello from the psychiatric-services unit at harvard, telling him that he had to go to the hospital again. an ambulance took wallace to mclean, the psychiatric facility in nearby belmont. there he was prescribed the drug nardil for the first time. we had a brief, maybe three-minute audience with the psychopharmacologist, his mother told rolling stone . in december, wallace was released and sent to a halfway house in brighton, a run-down section of boston. it is a grim place, and i am grimly resolved to go there, he wrote to nadell. he became serious about fighting his addictions. he participated in alcohol and narcotic rehabilitation programs. he replaced pot with cigarettes and, ultimately, with chewing tobacco, which he unsuccessfully tried to quit. before his collapse, he had written observations in notebooks. he took this up again; amy wallace remembers him writing in one with a care bears cover. but he found that he had lost his commitment to fiction. he was becoming healthy, but felt adrift. in may, 1990, he wrote to jonathan franzen, with whom he had recently become friends, right now, i am a pathetic and very confused young man, a failed writer at 28 who is so jealous, so sickly searingly envious of you and [william] vollmann and mark leyner and even david fuckwad leavitt and any young man who is right now producing pages with which he can live, and even approving them off some base clause of conviction about the enterprises meaning and end. he added that he considered suicide a reasonable if not at this point a desirable option with respect to the whole wretched problem. slowly, normality and a pleasure in writing fiction returned to wallace. like all the residents of the house, he had a job. one day, he was supposed to be editing the house rules, but instead he played hooky, holing up in a brighton library with flight of fear, a teen adventure novel. i found it a ripping good read, he wrote franzen. he added, i think back with much saliva to times in 1984, 85, 86, 87 when id sit down and look up and it would be hours later and thered be this mess of filled up notebook paper and i just felt wrung out and well fucked and well blessed. he wasnt sure all those filled notebooks had been worth it, though; he now saw himself as having been driven by a basically vapid urge to be avant-garde and post structural and linguistically calisthenic. this is why i get very spiny when i think someones suggesting this may be my root motive and character because im afraid it might be. at the halfway house, wallace got to know people with radically different backgrounds. mr. howard, he wrote his editor, everyone here has a tattoo or a criminal record or both! the halfway house also showed him that less intellectual people were often better at dealing with life. they found catchphrases such as one day at a time genuinely helpful. to his surprise, so did he. as he later told salon , the idea that something so simple and, really, so aesthetically uninterestingwhich for me meant you pass over it for the interesting, complex stuffcan actually be nourishing in a way that arch, meta, ironic, pomo stuff cant, that seems to me to be important. wallace picked up stories at treatment sessions, including his own. former addicts loved to talkpart of their therapy was to talk. eventually, wallace was released to a quarter-way house, and then to a house with one other ex-addict. wallace taught at emerson college for a time. ive had to educate myself about people like stephen crane and edith wharton, he wrote franzen in october, 1991. actually thats been a blast. i had no idea they were so good. i remember reading them a little in high school and mostly wondering when they would get done so i could go eat something sugary and then masturbate. he added that the last thin patina of rebelliousness has fallen off. by then, he had started working on the projecthis name for his second novel. in march, 1991, he informed nadell that he was now writing daily on a schedule. roughly a year later, he promised her that he was going to shoot for having at least 100 pages (roughly probably a sixth or seventh) of this long document in your hands by april. when the pages were ready, he wanted them to go to gerald howard, with the voluminous notes of explanation and defense ill doubtless enclose. he was still interested in the warping power of media culture. and he had a new appreciation of addiction and its lethality: it gave him something to warn against. he created a character named hal incandenza, who bridged two worlds wallace knew wellincandenza is a pothead and a talented high-school tennis player. he goes to an academy run by his family, which his older brother, orin, also attended. their father, james, a filmmaker, committed suicide after making a short movie called infinite jest, recorded in a format called a cartridge, which is so engrossing that anyone who watches it loses all desire. wallace writes of one viewer, he has rewound to the beginning several times and then configured for a recursive loop. he sits there, attached to a congealed supper, watching at 0020h, having now wet both his pants and the special recliner. the action is set in the near future: a qu-bcois separatist group tries to get hold of infinite jest, copies of which are extremely rare, to use as a terrorist weapon. wallace worked quickly in the house that he shared. he filled page after page of grade-school notebooks and then typed what hed written with two fingers on an old computer. in a letter to nadell, he had made a promise: i will be a fiction writer again or die trying.

in june, 1992, wallace set out for syracuse. the rents were cheap, and wallace wanted to put the traumas of boston behind him. he found a room to work in, opposite the food co-op. it was so small, he told friends, that his own body heat would keep it warm enough. he returned to the project; the writing continued to go well, and he stayed focussed. around town, wallace was a familiar sight in his t-shirt, granny glasses, shorts, and bandanna. (he told rolling stone that he wore it to keep his head from exploding.) the poet mary karr, who taught at syracuse and dated wallace, recalls him filling his five-and-dime notebooks with that fastidious little spider hand. if he was working well, he would make sure to use the same pen the next day; hed call it his orgasm pen. costello, who visited him at syracuse, recalls, he would walk around with a notebook, sit down, cross his legs, and start writing. desperate as his life was, he was working. by may, 1992, he had sent two hundred pages of infinite jest to howard, who read them with amazement. he now saw wallaces addiction, descent, and recovery as a ceremony of purification. michael pietsch, an editor at little, brown who had become friends with wallace, also read the pages. i want to do this book more than i want to breathe, he told bonnie nadell. pietsch, who had a reputation for publishing innovative fiction, outbid howard with an eighty-thousand-dollar offer, and wallace changed publishers. wallace was pushing himself to get beyond the facile skepticism of broom. in 1993, he told whiskey island , a literary magazine, this is a generation that has an inheritance of absolutely nothing as far as meaningful moral values, and its our job to make them up. he detected a pervasive sadness in the country. it manifests itself as a kind of lostness, he told salon , in an interview after the book was published. infinite jest is a story of people in pain. near the books opening, hal incandenza is rushed to an emergency room in the midst of a breakdown: it will start in the e.r., at the intake desk . . . or in the green-tiled room after the room with the invasive-digital machines; or, given this special m.d.-supplied ambulance, maybe on the ride itself: some blue-jawed m.d. scrubbed to an antiseptic glow with his name sewn in cursive on his white coats breast pocket and a quality desk-set pen, wanting gurneyside q&a, etiology and diagnosis by socratic method, ordered and point-by-point. there are, by the o.e.d. vis count, nineteen nonarchaic synonyms for unresponsive , of which nine are latinate and four saxonic. . . . it will be someone blue-collar and unlicensed, though, inevitablya nurses aide with quick-bit nails, a hospital security guy, a tired cuban orderly who addresses me as jou who will, looking down in the middle of some kind of bustled task, catch what he sees as my eye and ask so yo then man whats your story? the passage held out a hope rarely signalled in his earlier work: the possibility that telling a story could lead to redemption. the idea had been central to the sobriety sessions he had attended. as he told salon, i get the feeling that a lot of us, privileged americans, as we enter our early 30s, have to find a way to put away childish things and confront stuff about spirituality and values. probably the a.a. model isnt the only way to do it, but it seems to me to be one of the more vigorous. his relationship with mary karr was volatile. she inspired a character in the novela radio host named madame psychosis who ends up in the halfway house. wallace got a tattoo of a heart with marys name on it. he signed his letters to her young werther. he proposed to her. they fought. someone you get sober with is like someone you were in vietnam with, karr remembers. they split up. one day, according to karr, he broke her coffee table. she billed him a hundred dollars. he paid her and said that the remains of the table were now his. karr told him that shed used them for firewood, and that all hed bought was the brokenness. in the spring of 1993, wallace submitted to pietsch the first two-thirds of infinite jestsome four hundred thousand words. pietsch, who had edited rick moody and mark leyner, had no trouble understanding wallaces aesthetic. he wrote wallace, its a novel made up out of shards, almost as if the story were something broken that someone is picking up the pieces of. he warned wallace that, at this rate, the finished book would likely top 1200 pages. yes, were very fortunate to be blessed with one of each. that same spring, wallace accepted a teaching job at illinois state university, in normal, which had started a center for contemporary literature. in illinois, with much of infinite jest written, he began to settle down. he bought a house, the first hed owned, on the outskirts of bloomington, a town that adjoined normal. he was happy to be back in the midwest. he got his first dog, jeeves, at the pound, and began to work at home. he chose a room to write in and painted it black, then filled it with dozens of vintage lamps. he preferred the company of townspeople to academics, and he made a point of being available to his students, especially those in the midst of personal crises. he told most people that he did not use e-mail, but he gave his students an address. sections of infinite jest began to appear in magazines, but he downplayed his growing fame as a writer. doug hesse, a colleague, made the mistake of praising an essay of wallaces. he did this gesture of wiping the butt with one hand and pointing to his mouth with the other, hesse remembers. i learned really really quickly not to go beyond the equivalent of hows the weather?  in bloomington, wallace struggled with the size of his book. he hit upon the idea of endnotes to shorten it. in april, 1994, he presented the idea to pietsch, adding, ive become intensely attached to this strategy and will fight w/all 20 claws to preserve it. he explained that endnotes allow . . . me to make the primary-text an easier read while at once 1) allowing a discursive, authorial intrusive style w/o finneganizing the story, 2) mimic the information-flood and data-triage i expectd be an even bigger part of us life 15 years hence. 3) have a lot more technical/medical verisimilitude 4) allow/make the reader go literally physically back and forth in a way that perhaps cutely mimics some of the storys thematic concerns . . . 5) feel emotionally like im satisfying your request for compression of text without sacrificing enormous amounts of stuff. he also said, i pray this is nothing like hypertext, but it seems to be interesting and the best way to get the exfoliating curve-line plot i wanted. pietsch countered with an offer of footnotes, which readers would find less cumbersome, but eventually agreed. though infinite jest had begun as a book with hal incandenza at its center, as it grew wallace moved his focus more to the figure of don gatelya former demerol addict and a member of alcoholics anonymous, who is now a supervisor at a halfway house down the hill from the tennis academy where hal plays. gately, who as a child was nicknamed b.i.m. (for big indestructible moron), is a tender thug. late in the book, qubcois separatists shoot him in the shoulder while he is trying to protect his charges, and many of the novels final hundred pages depict gatelys thoughts as he lies immobilized in his hospital bed, going over his life in his mind. because he refuses to take narcotic painkillers, gately is in agony, but he learns a way to get inside his suffering. he could do the dextral pain, he thinks. no single instant of it was unendurable. . . . he hadnt quite gotten this before now, how it wasnt just the matter of riding out the cravings for a substance: everything unendurable was in the head, was the head not abiding in the present but hopping the wall and doing a recon and then returning with unendurable news. gately is the first character whose distress seems to touch wallace. he wrote gatelys reverie quickly; he even sent jeeves away so that he could work without interruptions. (talking to costello, he said that his work was going so well that he couldnt feel my ass in the chair.) infinite jest ends with gately, in a haze, imagining a peaceful end, possibly his death: and when he came back to, he was flat on his back on the beach in the freezing sand, and it was raining out of a low sky, and the tide was way out. wallace sent the remaining six hundred pages of the manuscript to pietsch in the summer of 1994. pietsch had not expected gately to assume such a dominant role. the ending of the novel, the horror of gatelys hitting bottom, is gorgeous and very very powerfully sad, he wrote wallace in december. he expressed concern, however, over the novels many dangling threads. earlier, he had cautioned wallace that the reader, after so many pages, would feel entitled to find out who or how or why. wallace was more certain of his literary approach than he had been when he published broom. he knew what he wanted to resolve and what not. he wrote to pietsch, we know exactly whats happening to gately by end, about 50% of whats happened to hal, and little but hints about orin. i can give you 5000 words of theoretico-structural argument for this, but lets spare one another, shall we? pietsch suggested extensive cuts, many of which wallace accepted. eventually, he learned to erase passages that he liked from his hard drive, in order to keep himself from putting them back in. in all, he delivered seventeen hundred pages, of which pietsch cut several hundred. the bound galleys went out with a list of corrections that hadnt made the printers deadline. infinite jest, published in february, 1996, quickly became a totem for young people. the postmodernist heyday was long past; minimalism was in decline. there was a wide opening for wallaces opaque sincerity. his impulse to second-guess every thought and proposition became something like a generational style, as gerald howard says. one day, howard was walking down west broadway, in manhattan, and came across a long line of people waiting to hear wallace read at rizzoli. there was this adoration, he remembers. he had reached people in this highly personal way. wallace did not like being the object of so much attention. he wrote to don delillo, with whom he had begun a correspondence, that he had tried my best to tell the truth and to be kind to reporters who hadnt read the book and wanted only to discuss the hype around the book and seemed willfully to ignore the fact that articles about the hype were themselves the hype (for about a week there it seemed to me that the book became the most photographed barn, everyone tremendously excited over the tremendous excitement surrounding a book that takes over a month of hard labor to read). as soon as he could, he finished his book tour and retreated to bloomington, to his house and to jeeves and the dronea stray who had joined him and jeeves one day when they were out running. in the wake of infinite jest, he felt anxiety about his writing. earlier, wallace had asked delillo whether it was normal. delillo reassured him, invoking henry jamess words: doubt is our passion. he added, some writers may have to do 2, 3 books, say in midcareer, before they remember that writing can be fun. wallace worked successfully on some stories, later published in the 2004 collection oblivion. in the soul is not a smithy, a man looking back on his childhood wonders how his father could have endured the boredom of his work as an actuary. the truth is i have no idea what he thought about, what his internal life might have been like, the son acknowledges. wallace also began to develop a taste for journalism. he could transmit, in a more straightforward way, his point that america was at once overentertained and sad. he took a trip on a cruise ship out of florida to sample the packaged hedonism, and chronicled the casual cruelty of the maine lobster fair. is it all right to boil a sentient creature alive just for our gustatory pleasure? he asked. yet he felt unfulfilled. when charlie rose interviewed him, in 1997, wallace said, a lot of my problem right now is i dont really have a brass ring, and im kind of open to suggestions about what one chases. he wrote to delillo that he thought he knew what was missing to get his fiction moving forward: i believe i want adult sanity, which seems to me the only unalloyed form of heroism available today.

t he pale king, the name wallace gave to the novel that, had he finished it, would have been his third, was one-third complete, by an estimate that he made to nadell in 2007. the novel continues wallaces preoccupation with mindfulness. it is about being in the moment and paying attention to the things that matter, and centers on a group of several dozen i.r.s. agents working in the midwest. their job is tedious, but dullness, the pale king suggests, ultimately sets them free. a typed note that wallace left in his papers laid out the novels idea: blissa-second-by-second joy and gratitude at the gift of being alive, consciouslies on the other side of crushing, crushing boredom. pay close attention to the most tedious thing you can find (tax returns, televised golf) and, in waves, a boredom like youve never known will wash over you and just about kill you. ride these out, and its like stepping from black and white into color. like water after days in the desert. instant bliss in every atom. on another draft sheet, wallace typed a possible epigraph for the book from borges and i, a prose poem by frank bidart: we fill pre-existing forms and when we fill them we change them and are changed. the problem was how to dramatize the idea. as michael pietsch points out, in choosing the i.r.s. as a subject wallace had posed himself the task that is almost the opposite of how fiction works, which is leaving out the things that are not of much interest. wallaces solution was to overwhelm his seemingly inert subject with the full movement of his thought. his characters might be low-level bureaucrats, but the robust sincerity of his writinghis willingness to die for the readerwould keep you from condescending to them. in one chapter, wallace narrates the spiritual awakening of a college student named chris fogle: i was by myself, wearing nylon warm-up pants and a black pink floyd tee shirt, trying to spin a soccer ball on my finger and watching the cbs soap opera as the world turns on the rooms little black-and-white zenith. . . . there was certainly always reading and studying for finals i could do, but i was being a wastoid. . . . anyhow, i was sitting there trying to spin the ball on my finger and watching the soap opera . . . and at the end of every commercial break, the shows trademark shot of planet earth as seen from space, turning, would appear, and the cbs daytime network announcers voice would say,  youre watching as the world turns,  which he seemed, on this particular day, to say more and more pointedly each time youre watching as the world turns  until the tone began to seem almost incredulous youre watching as the world turns until i was suddenly struck by the bare reality of the statement. . . . it was as if the cbs announcer were speaking directly to me, shaking my shoulder or leg as though trying to arouse someone from sleep youre watching as the world turns.  . . . i didnt stand for anything. if i wanted to mattereven just to myselfi would have to be less free, by deciding to choose in some kind of definite way. fogle decides to join the i.r.s., and soon heads off for training in peoria. he finds that the sustained attentiveness demanded by tax work is not easy to muster. one of fogles colleagues, lane dean, jr., finds it especially difficult to push away the outside world. as he processes forms, dean tries to visualize a sunny beach, as the agency taught him to do during orientation. but he cannot maintain the imageit turns in his mind to a gray expanse covered with dead kelp like the hair of the drowned. overcome with boredom, he entertains suicide as a possibility. he had the sensation of a great type of hole or emptiness falling through him and continuing to fall and never hitting the floor, wallace writes. other agents are adepts. an agent named mitchell drinion is so centered and calm that he levitates as he works. drinion is happy , wallace wrote in one of the notebooks he kept while writing the pale king. another agent can recite a sequence of numbers that takes him into a state of exalted concentration. there is also an anxious young agent who sweated uncontrollably in high school, racing to the bathroom where the toilet paper disintegrate[s] into little greebles and blobs all over his forehead. he is afraid of thinking about being afraid, lest he suddenly become afraid and break out in a sweatthe victim of an endless funhouse hall of mirrors of fear. in the quiet study of tax forms he seeks composure. the pale king does not abandon postmodernism entirely: the novel is structured as a mock memoir. in a chapter called authors foreword, wallace informs the reader that he was once an employee at the i.r.s. upon entering the bureaucracy, he reveals, agents are given new social security numbers; taking a job there is like being born again. (the conceit is pure fiction.) in the mid-eighties, wallace announces, he became 947-04-2012. after being caught selling term papers and suspended from his preppy college, he cast around for something to do, and applied to work at the i.r.s. the agency hired him as a wigglerthe first people to go over returns arriving at the agency. i arrived for intake processing at lake james, ils i.r.s. post 047, sometime in mid-may of 1985, wallace writes. (a digression followsa long footnote on the history of lake james, followed by commentary about the confusion of having an i.r.s. office whose mailing address and building address are in separate towns.) upon arriving at the intake center, wallace says, he was given special treatment after being mistaken for another david wallacea high-powered accountant transferring to the facility from rome, new york. for much of the chapter, everyone at the i.r.s. thinks that david foster wallace is the other wallace, giving the author a double to go with his fictional rebirth. on his undeserved v.i.p. tour, wallace gets a glimpse of a different worlda calmer one, with a silence . . . both sensuous and incongruous. his chatty guide, ms. neti-neti, accidentally opens the wrong door, showing him the room where agents do their silent work. wallace portrays it as a kind of monastery: i caught a glimpse of a long room filled with i.r.s. examiners in long rows and columns of strange-looking tables or desks, each of which (desks) had a raised array of trays or baskets clamped to its top, with flexible-necked desk lamps in turn clamped at angles to these fanned-out arrays, so that each of the i.r.s. examiners worked in a small tight circle of light. . . . row after row, stretching to a kind of vanishing point near the rooms rear wall. wallaces unquiet mind is not yet ready for this paradise. ms. neti-neti quickly spirits him away.