on a recent weekend, john cale and friends played two programs in the bam next wave festival . on thursday and friday, they played the velvet underground & nico; on saturday, they played music from cales long and daring solo career , in celebration of his seventy-fifth birthday. cale is eternally next wave, avant-garde forever. he is a reluctant nostalgist, but our collective love for his early work is intense, and sometimes he consents to play it for us. cale left the velvet underground in 1968, after its second album,  white light/white heat , and had tensions with lou reed then and in the decades that followed. the prospect of hearing him play the velvet underground & nico at bam felt like a minor spiritual coupsomething you couldnt quite imagine happening when reed was alive.

before the thursday-night show, the warhol banana from the album cover was featured on a series of playful circles that hung over the stage; on the back wall was an image of the band in the sixties, everybody in sunglasses. it felt like an opera-house nod to the exploding plastic inevitable . the friend id brought had just been to the new stephen shore retrospective at moma , which includes photographs of reed and cale at the factory that shore took as a teen-ager. he showed me the images on his phone. in one, reed is slumped on a couch with a hand over his mouth, looking nervous and insecure, but from the waist downknee bent, legs splayed widehes all macho aggression. in the other, cale is playing guitar , looking focussed and content, beneath warhols gunslinging elvis i & ii.

cale and his musicians took the stage in shadow. cale wore black, in mysterious layers, and his hair stood up white and angular, like a plume. tonights a special night, he said. there were young, fresh artists (these included members of the wordless music orchestra, animal collective, mgmt, the oh sees, and kurt vile, along with cales band), and a few not with ustheres lou, theres nico, theres andy. (sterling morrison died in 1995; moe tucker, alive and well, wasnt there.) the show began not with the sweet, dark chimes of sunday morning, as the album doesa lullaby that introduces a torrent of blissful avant-garde mayhembut with im waiting for the man. i didnt recognize it immediately; it sounded a bit like the more cale-ish black angels death song. cale stood at the center of the stage, in front of a high keyboard, like a captain in a cockpit. its impossible to hear the songs lyrics without imagining reeds voice up to lexington, one-two-fiveand it was a strange, subversive thrill to hear cale singing it. reed wasnt a lighthearted guy, but cales dour welsh gravitas is something else entirely. he followed im feeling good / im feeling so fine with until tomorrow, but thats another fucking time, which made me laugh.

the second song, thrillingly, was white light/white heat. this wasnt on the program! id idly wondered if cale would include some songs from this album, and had secretly hoped that he would. colored lights spun over the theatre, and people in the ornate statler-and-waldorf opera boxes turned dreamy colors. it was a rocking rendition; i wished i could dance. after a satisfying cacophony, with a wave of cales hand bam! it ended, powerfully. a balding man in a leather jacket stood up and pumped his fist.

that mood kept up throughout the concerta pleasurable tension between the avant-garde of the sixties, which we all knew by heart, and the artistry of cale and his acolytes now. all tomorrows parties featured some satisfyingly moe tucker-like drumming, as well as sousaphone. for venus in furs, cale simultaneously sang and played viola, which delighted me. i missed the harsh, almost psycho-like bowing of the record, which is so satisfying, and was fascinated when cale seemed to forget the words strike, dear mistress, and cure his heart and threw in an extra taste the whip, now bleed for me, instead. it occurred to me that, in recent decades, ive probably listened to this song much more than cale has im the one whos obsessed with the velvet underground, and he has long since moved on. severin! severin! he cried out, sounding like a fun vampire.

before ill be your mirror, sung by sky ferreira, a man in the balcony yelled, you guys changed my life! cale soldiered on with a polite nod. there she goes again had a confusingly caribbean feel. i wrote, what is this style/rhythm? and handed my notebook to my friend, a musician. he squinted, wrote, and handed it back: reggae? it said. kurt vile sang run run run; having young people singing these ancient lines about scoring drugs felt like a funny generational passing of the torch. mgmt sang a good black angels death song, accompanied by fog. most of the singers werent imitating reeds style, which was for the bestbut i realized, as the night went on, that reeds sensitivity and posturing were essential to what the album is . suddenly i missed him so much it hit me sharply, with a pang.

caroline polachek, with a dress and a manner that suggested a blissed-out morticia addams, sang femme fatale; for the lovable lady godivas operationmore white light/white heat!connan mockasin wore a white nurses uniform, and we got to hear cale sing things like, dont panic, someone give him pentothal instantly. a blissful sunday morning came toward the end, without cales chiming celesta but with sweetness, sung by polachek, and projections of sixties or seventies times square in time-faded pinks and peaches. tunde adebimpe, from tv on the radio, sang heroin, with red lights, cale on viola, a drone intro, the string quartet, and a bobbing sousaphone. the songs glorious rushing and slowing gave me chillsclipper ship, rushing on my run, jesus son. cales hair shone red, his viola-playing deliberate and just right. at this point, ive had several live  heroin  experiences; my love for the velvet underground is such that i try to inhale its vapors wherever i can. here, i felt gratitude, admiration, and some strange measure of guilti suspect that cale is proud of this music and his role in it, but would rather keep plowing ahead, pulling us with him into the future.

at the concerts close, they played a big, blustering  sister ray . i enjoy a pounding, dirgelike  sister ray the classic. this was more of an upbeat synth parade, loud but diffuse. the songs beginning, normally so driving and powerful, here felt more like its usual middle, where it starts orgying out in all directions. cales vocals were muffledevery once in a while, you could hear a mainline or a sideways or a ding-dong. all the musicians streamed onstagethe quartet, the longhairs, the nurse, the chanteuses. it looked and felt like an underwater freak-out, the inside of a lava lamp. they lined up and took a bow, and we all streamed out feeling happy. my friend and i spent a couple of hours excitedly yammering about it over drinks: what we missed, what we loved, thoughts about  songs for drella  and nico singles and the gorgeous  candy says  duet that antony (now known as anohni ) sang with reed a few years ago.

saturday night was much differentno pop art, no ghosts, no bananas. here comes unadulterated cale, i thought. the show began with quiet and a translucent, purple-lit curtain. hail, hail, john cale! a man yelled. behind the scrim, musicians in white suit jackets and gold pants took the stage. we heard a drone. ahh , i thought. cales paris 1919 show at bam , a few years ago, had included an amiable drone fest. i thought of the glorious lou reed-homage drone id experienced last summer, and of something that laurie anderson said to me about drone earlier this year: meditators love it. it just gets you in a very deep place. sitting there listening to the wow-wow-wow felt right, alive, engaging. cale sang frozen warningsfriar hermit stumbles over / the cloudy borderline. he stood up, strapped a guitar on, and began singing about gravel .

the shows playbill described that nights performance as a genre-bending audio-visual journey featuring bespoke arrangements of old and new songs, within contextual tapestries of drone, noise, feedback, low subs, and collapsible rhythms. if you had come for a soothing childs christmas in wales, friend, brace yourself. he did a sombre hedda gabler (tired of waiting / tired of the human race) and a funk-rock e is missing, in which he sang of a derelict lighthouse signalling men in shipwrecks under the ocean and secret bruises from the writing machine. cale is often much funnier than his affect would implyone of his many mysterious charms. hes also predictably unpredictable. he transmogrified the normally lovely half past france, from paris 1919, with enough sonic menace to make it slightly alien, unrecognizable, and paired it with images of live bees teeming on the walls and ceiling. it was a brechtian half past france, like industry, or screaming. two people walked up the aisle. i suppose im glad im on this train, cale sang. would the tension break, i wondered, and allow us any of the songs usual pleasures? old hollweg knows his way around, cale sang. hes no fool. the friend id brought observed later that sometimes, that night, youd had to supply the melody yourself. at the paris 1919 bam show, cale had played it more straightforwardlyperhaps, i had thought then, with a tinge of reluctance. now he was doing it his way: jarring, rough, not making it easy on any of us. the bees swarmed and fiddled.

next, a pleasant surprise: a spirited  fear is a mans best friend , with funny visuals of giant chattering skulls. that brilliant song, from the 1973 album fear, had got me through our perilous springtimei even played it for david remnick on the new yorker radio hourand hearing it now was like rencountering an old friend. they played it on just the rock instruments, which felt refreshing. life and death are just things that you do when youre bored, cale sang. say, fear is a mans best friend! this feeling was what i had come for.

they played a searing  you know more than i know , the gorgeous ballad from fear, but only the slightest bit of melody snaked in. ship of fools, from paris 1919, was somewhat upbeat, with a choir (the bgv music choral group) and a bit of dancing. as the night wore on, impressive, formidable, sincerely felt, it also grated. cale, like many challenging experimental musicians who play in a rock-pop idiom, doles out simple joys sparingly, surrounding them with noise and angst. those elements are vital, toobut when the delicious moments come they can feel like a guilty pleasure. ive often felt like a bad cale fan because i tend to focus on the beautiful stuff; tonight, i was getting my just deserts. but i was still enjoying his mind, respecting his sound, and marvelling at his lyrics, which tend to be earthy or seafaring, brilliant, and amusing. he sang about fishermen and picking up dracula in memphis and darkness by swansea. illustrated waves on the ceiling reminded me of raymond pettibons surf paintings; the mood became suspiciously upbeat. a guy yelled, happy birthday, man!

thank you, cale said. they played  hanky panky nohow  with just guitars, drums, and keyboard. it lacked the warm cello of the original and included eerie backup singing coming from a place i couldnt see. theres a law for everything / and for elephants that sing / to keep the cows that agriculture wont allow / hanky panky nohow, cale sang. that day, as it happened, these lovely lyricslaws, elephantsprovoked thoughts of trump and trophy hunters, and i realized more consciously that part of my excitement about the cale shows had come from wanting joy, a respite, a sanctuary from life in 2017, as i had craved so often with the arts this year. but arts job isnt only to comfort, especially if youre john cale.

cale took no breaks, chatted no chat. he just played, thanked us, nodded and waved to guide the musicians, and sang lyrics like were living in a wasteland. the soil is cold and damp. volcanoes in the distance. riverbeds run dry. here and there, several people went up the aisles; fewer of them came back. an aggressive new song called pretty people featured videos of women with masklike faces and lyrics about a monster that shakes you to your core. another new song was called hatred. it did not feel like a birthday party, but it did, perhaps, feel like john cales birthday party.

o.k., this is a new one, cale said, looking invigorated. its called what is the legal status of ice?  it was the final song. painted images of blue blob shapes appeared behind him, like frosty mammoths, or arctic fry guys. what is the legal status of ice? cale sang, in his lovably riled-up way. i laughed; i loved it; i didnt know what the hell he was doing, any more than i know the legal status of ice. hail, hail, john cale.