middlemarch, by george eliot

everyone has a list of unread books that weighs on her conscience each passing year that it remains unchanged. at the top of mine was  middlemarch , by george eliot, a classic that i managed to put off again and again, even as an english major with an enduring love for victorian-era chitchat. the other weekend, i pulled a new edition from a shelf at greenlight bookstore, in fort greene, and opened it to a blurb by virginia woolf: middlemarch, the magnificent book which with all its imperfections, is one of the few english novels written for grown-up people. below it, a quote from hermione lee, the author of the excellent biography of virginia woolf: the most profound, wise and absorbing of english novels . . . and, above all, truthful and forgiving about human behaviour. all right, all right ! ill give it a shot. many others (including rebecca mead, who wrote the foreword to that same edition) have said it before, and more eloquently, but, man, is middlemarch good. i mean, miss-your-stop-on-the-train and sneak-a-read-at-work good.

the story follows the fortunes of several interconnected families in the fictional town of middlemarch, in the mid-eighteen-hundreds (eliot first published the work in 1871). theres something about well-appointed english drawing rooms and breathless visits to the countryside that feels like safe and sandy relief after an onslaught of depressing news. thats not to say that eliots subjects are small. just the opposite: she presents her characters with such incisive clarity that they rise up like essential case studies of the human condition. and she loves her characters! even with all their lumpy, unflattering faults, eliot gives everyone their say. theres dry mr. casaubon, laboring over his interminable key to all mythologies (a nightmare for any writer). theres pretty rosamond, self-absorbed but supremely strong-willed; and hapless fred, who embodies the phrase failure to launch. eliots is a working empathy, generous without being nave, like all grown-up people should possess. i mentioned reading the book to a friend, already a convert, who remarked that she often classifies people in her social life by their similarities to the characters of middlemarcha fred here, a dorothea there, a real mary garth three doors down. its not a bad way to see the world. anna russell

deep work, by cal newport

cal newport is a professor of computer science at georgetown who studies the theory of distributed algorithms. on the side, hes a self-help guruand his 2016 book,  deep work: rules for focused success in a distracted world , has brought a new level of order to my mental life. newport divides work into two categories, shallow and deep. shallow workanswering e-mails, sayis something you can pick up and put down; deep workwriting an article, solving a math problemrequires sustained, uninterrupted, and intense periods of concentration. newport proposes that the metric by which you should judge your effectiveness at work isnt getting things donestyle productivity, but depth. in part, deep work is a how-to book: newport offers many strategies for going deep. (they mostly involve tracking how much deep work you accomplish, and planning your weeks and days with a realistic sense of how much time deep work really requires.) but the book is also a sustained and insightful critique, written by a technologist, of the tools and habits of connected life. those tools prioritize shallow work over deepand that presents an opportunity, newport writes, for those who can swim out to the deep end. ive read lots of books about productivity and lots of books about distraction. for me, deep work is among the best, on both counts. joshua rothman

into words: the selected writings of carroll dunham, by carroll dunham

last week, when christies stunt sale of a rehabbed painting by leonardo da vinci turned thinking about art into being gobsmacked by money, i staved off depression by reading the writing of carroll dunham . dunham is best known for his superlatively smart, weird, and no-holds-barred paintings. he is one of my favorite artists, and im not alone. when the whitney museum opened its new building, in 2015, dunhams stunning large bathera rainbow-bright frankenstein monster made of spare parts from czanne, courbet, and japanese shunga eroticahad pride of place in the final gallery of the inaugural show. a light projection by paul chan was installed nearby, a fact thats worth noting because chans spirited press, badlands unlimited, is the publisher of dunhams first book of essays.

as an author, dunham is a late bloomer. now sixty-eight, he didnt begin writing in earnest until his early fifties, primarily in artforum magazine, where he distilled years of hard thinking into thicket-clearing prose on subjects ranging from robert rauschenbergs game-changing combines to the late paintings of pierre-auguste renoir. along the way, he nailed the art of the killer first sentence. pablo picasso can be exhausting to think about. kara walkers work seems to have always brought out the worst in her. painting in new york during the second half of the 1970s was a mess. some of his best insights in the book arise when he turns his eye on his own work. take this crystalline explanation of the interdependence of art for arts sake and real life, from the essay dead, yellow. mule. garbage, ratio, giant., written in 2007: painting responds to painting: the world doesnt help very much but leakage occurs between dimensions. andrea k. scott

looking for new books? every tuesday, our writers and editors tell you what theyre reading. browse the new yorker recommends to discover more cultural recommendations from our staff.