trumps lawyers want to convey the impression that he has nothing to hide. illustration by barry blitt audio: listen to this story. to hear more feature stories, download the audm app for your iphone.

last june, less than a month after president donald trump fired james comey, the director of the f.b.i., the senate intelligence committee convened to hear comeys testimony about a bizarre series of conversations hed had with trump. the strangest of these took place on february 14th, in the oval office, after comey attended a meeting with a group of senior officials, including vice-president mike pence and attorney general jeff sessions. trump asked comey to remain when the others left. he wanted to talk about michael flynn, who had served as a top official in trumps campaign and had resigned from his position as the presidents national-security adviser the previous day, after information about pre-inauguration phone conversations hed had with the russian ambassador leaked to the press. trump knew that the f.b.i. was investigating flynn for lying about these calls, among other possible crimes, and he had a favor to ask of comey. i hope you can see your way clear to letting this go, to letting flynn go, trump said. he is a good guy. trump is not generally known for his magnanimous impulses toward former associates, so the question of why he wanted the f.b.i. to ease up on flynn became a matter of intense debate. we may now know the reason. on december 1st, in federal court in washington, d.c., flynn pleaded guilty to making false statements in the investigation the president wanted to stop. flynn admitted to lying to the f.b.i. about his conversations with sergey kislyak, the russian ambassador, concerning sanctions imposed on russia by president obama. flynn also apparently reported on discussions with the russian ambassador to k. t. mcfarland, a fox news analyst who became trumps deputy national-security adviser, and jared kushner, trumps son-in-law and trusted adviser. at the time of the conversations, the russia sanctions were of interest to the president-electlargely, it seems, because they were of great interest to russia. vladimir putins government wanted them lifted, and flynn let kislyak know that help was on the way. after the contact with flynn, russian officials decided to wait until the new administration was in place to respond to obamas sanctions. this pleased the president-elect, who tweeted, great move on delay (by v. putin)i always knew he was very smart! on this topic, as on so many others, the new administration seemed to see things russias way. for months, trump has insisted that the investigations into russian meddlinginvestigations being conducted by the special counsel robert mueller and by both the senate and house intelligence committeesamount to nothing more than fake news. but, as is so often the case when the president cries fake news, the truth soon emerges. flynns encounter with kislyak gets at central questions about the 2016 presidential campaign and election: why were trump and russia doing one anothers bidding, and what promises were made between the candidate and that country in the event that he won? flynn has now committed himself to answering those questions. he was charged with a single felony count, escaping multiple charges of greater magnitude in exchange for his coperation with prosecutors. the leniency of the deal indicates that flynn has information not only about the transition-team members but also about his superiorsand the national-security advisers only real superior is the president of the united states. comey, whose testimony before the senate intelligence committee mapped out the presidents potential obstruction of justice, certainly seems to feel vindicated by flynns guilty plea and by what it might mean for trump. shortly after the news broke, comey, referring to the biblical book of amos, tweeted, but justice roll down like waters and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.

mueller was appointed on may 17th, a week after comey was fired, by rod j. rosenstein, who was acting as attorney general after jeff sessions recused himself from matters related to the investigation. mueller was directed to conduct a full and thorough investigation of the russian governments efforts to interfere in the 2016 election . . . including any links and/or coordination between the russian government and individuals associated with the campaign of president donald trump. in the months since then, muellers task has often been described as an inquiry into possible collusion between the trump campaign and russiaparadoxically, that framing has also become the heart of trumps defense. at least two officials in trumps inner circle have now lied to investigators about their dealings with russia; four have been charged with felonies. flynns guilty plea and promise to coperate bring the investigation into the oval office for the first time. the charge against him, along with the cases against other members of trumps campaign, also hint at the kind of case mueller may be building, and what defense the president and his associates may have. three lawyers form the core of the presidents defense team: ty cobb, john dowd, and jay sekulow. in july, trump hired cobb away from private practice at the washington law firm of hogan lovells, where he specialized in white-collar criminal defense, to serve as the white house liaison to muellers office. cobb is sixty-seven years old, with a voluptuous handlebar mustache and a serene manner. (according to family lore, he is a distant cousin of the late baseball star of the same name.) cobb describes his duties as mundane in the extreme. i feel most of the time like a second-year associate, because all i do is produce documents, he told me. my approach has been principally to accelerate the production of documents and the availability of witnesses to the fullest extent i can, with the hope of getting rid of this cloud that hampers the president in foreign policy, in domestic policy, and has the country confused and experiencing a malaise of the type that jimmy carter once explained. i think ive got a willing partner in mueller, who also understands the importance of his task and the impact that it has on the presidency. the white house lawyers, including cobb, represent the institution of the presidency, and trumps own lawyers, including dowd and sekulow, protect their clients personal interests, but as a practical matter their goals are aligned: to make sure that trump survives the mueller investigation with his presidency, and his liberty, intact. trumps public reaction to the investigation has been expressed principally through sekulow, who is representing the president in an unlikely partnership with dowd, who was hired in june. dowd is best known for leading major league baseballs investigation of pete rose for gambling on games, and, even though he has had fewer prominent cases recently than in the past, his hiring made a certain sense. dowd is close to john f. kelly, the white house chief of staff, who recommended him for the job, and who, like dowd, is a retired marine and a native of the boston area. sekulow grew up in a jewish family on long island, and, after a religious awakening during his college years, in atlanta, he joined the messianic group jews for jesus. following law school, he worked for the internal revenue service, then founded a law firm that later went bankrupt. in 1986, he became the general counsel for jews for jesus. sekulows advocacy on behalf of the groups aggressive proselytizing brought him to the attention of pat robertson, the religious leader and conservative activist. the two men founded the american center for law and justice, a right-wing counterpart of the american civil liberties union, and the new organization thrived, thanks to the pairs expertise in direct-mail fund-raising. sekulow built a lavish headquarters for the a.c.l.j. in a renovated town house near the supreme court, and he branched out into public advocacy for a variety of conservative causes, including, eventually, the presidential candidacy of donald trump. by now, sekulow is as much a media figure as an attorney. he has had a nationally syndicated radio show, called jay sekulow live!, and he frequently appears on fox news. sekulow has only modest experience in criminal law, but the president appreciated his spirited appearances on cable news and hired him as the public face of his defense. (dowd remains behind the scenes.) for now, sekulow and cobb are sticking to their original strategy. they have advertised their willingness to coperate with mueller as a sign that trump has nothing to hide, and their reaction to flynns guilty plea reflects this view. nothing about the guilty plea or the charge implicates anyone other than mr. flynn, cobb said. with regard to muellers broader investigation, the white house lawyers position continues to be that president trump didnt commit a crime because no one didor couldbecause there is no federal crime called collusion, and rosensteins order did not refer to any criminal statutes that may have been violated. in several conversations with me, sekulow emphasized that collusion between the trump campaign and russia, even if it did take place, wouldnt be illegal. for something to be a crime, there has to be a statute that you claim is being violated, sekulow told me. there is not a statute that refers to criminal collusion. there is no crime of collusion.

the mueller investigation appears to consist, roughly, of three areas of inquiry. the first focusses on illegal lobbying by people affiliated with the trump campaign; the second relates to the hacking of e-mail accounts associated with hillary clintons campaign and the democratic national committee; and the third involves possible obstruction of justice by trump and others after he was inaugurated. (muellers office declined to comment.) the lobbying investigation was initiated more than a year ago, by prosecutors in justice department headquarters, in washington, and in the united states attorneys office in manhattan. on october 30th, the probes first findings came to light when a grand jury in washington charged paul manafort, the former chairman of trumps campaign, and rick gates, manaforts longtime deputy, with various crimes arising from their lobbying work for the government of ukraine. the thirty-one-page indictment accused the two men of twelve felonies, including money laundering, failure to register as foreign agents, and making false statements to government investigators. (manafort and gates pleaded not guilty.) just as cobb dismissed the significance of flynns guilty plea for the president, sekulow brushed off the manafort and gates case as unrelated to trump. sekulow said, these are serious charges, no question, but theyre not charges that involve the campaign. still, the steps mueller has taken suggest that, in one respect, he is using a traditional approach to a complex criminal investigation. he is trying to obtain guilty pleas or convictions in peripheral areas to win the coperation of witnesses who can illuminate the issues at the center of his inquiry. but unlike in, say, the investigation of an insider-trading ring or an organized-crime family, its unclear that the core issue in muellers casethe connections, or collusion, between the trump campaign and russiais a crime at all.

when it comes to the issue of collusion, muellers prosecutors might take a lesson from sekulows career. in the nineteen-eighties and nineties, sekulow represented a number of religious groups before the supreme court: jews for jesus members who wanted to distribute leaflets at los angeles international airport, a christian youth group in nebraska that wanted to conduct prayers in a public school after class, and an evangelical group that wanted to show religious films in a public school in off-hours. in other, similar cases, lawyers had argued that such religious groups had been denied their right to free exercise of religion under the first amendment. but these claims had mixed success, because the defendants argued that the religious groups were actually engaging in the establishment of religion by the government, in violation of a different clause of the first amendment. sekulow cut through this problem by ignoring the religion clauses and arguing to the justices that his clients were being denied their right to free speech. by repackaging free-exercise claims as free-speech cases, sekulow avoided having to address a countervailing constitutional principle and thereby turned losing arguments into winning cases. mueller may need to make a similar transformationin his case, to relabel collusion as criminal conspiracy. paul fishman, who served as the obama-era united states attorney in new jersey, where he supervised the prosecution of governor chris christies subordinates in the bridgegate scandal, told me about one possible case that mueller may be building. there is no crime called collusion, but the evidence of collusion could be seen as a conspiracy to violate a specific provision of the federal code, he said. the law of conspiracy requires an agreement to something that the law already forbids. that, of course, raises the questions of what, exactly, the conspirators did and what underlying laws they may have violated. the full nature of the trump campaigns ties to russia is not yet publicly known, but the established facts suggest conspiratorial behaviorand may even prove it. the key evidence thus far consists of several rounds of e-mails between trump-campaign officials and individuals associated with russia. on june 3rd, rob goldstone, a colorful british publicist who had worked for trump at the 2013 miss universe contest, in moscow, e-mailed donald trump, jr., to say that a russian official was offering to provide the trump campaign with some official documents and information that would incriminate hillary and her dealings with russia and would be very useful to your father. this is obviously very high level and sensitive information but is part of russia and its governments support for mr. trump. the younger trump wrote back, if its what you say i love it especially later in the summer. the e-mail thread was headed russia-clintonprivate and confidential, and the promised meeting took place on june 9, 2016, at trump tower, in new york. the attendees included trump, jr., and a russian lawyer introduced by goldstone, as well as paul manafort, then the campaign chairman, and jared kushner. later that summer, on july 22nd, wikileaks released tens of thousands of e-mails that had been stolen from the democratic national committee. a few days later, trump said during a press conference, referring to e-mails that clinton had deleted from her private server, russia, if youre listening, i hope youre able to find the thirty thousand e-mails that are missing. i think you will probably be rewarded mightily by our press. several months later, starting on october 7th, wikileaks began a piecemeal release of tens of thousands more stolen e-mails, these from the account of john podesta, clintons campaign chair. (i love wikileaks! trump said at a rally three days later.) the atlantic recently reported that, on october 12th, a wikileaks twitter account sent a direct message to trump, jr. hey donald, great to see you and your dad talking about our publications, the message said. strongly suggest your dad tweets this link if he mentions us, it continued, pointing trump, jr., to a link where viewers could search the stolen documents. fifteen minutes later, donald trump, the candidate, tweeted, very little pick-up by the dishonest media of incredible information provided by wikileaks. so dishonest! rigged system! a few days after that, trump, jr., tweeted out the wikileaks link to the stolen e-mails. why speculate? get your info straight from the source! does any of this behavior rise to the level of criminality, and, if so, what laws might it have violated? federal law prohibits political candidates and their advisers from seeking or obtaining contributions from foreign individuals or entities. foreigners cant contribute to federal, state, or local campaigns, and that doesnt just cover cash contributions, kathleen clark, a professor at the law school of washington university in st. louis, told me. according to the statute, if a campaign solicits a foreigner to give a thing of value to a political campaign, that would be illegal as well. the argument for a criminal-conspiracy charge based on these exchanges would be that trump officials, including the candidate, solicited opposition research from russian interests, and that such research is a thing of value, an in-kind contribution, under the law. there is clearly a market for damaging information about opponents in political campaigns, clark said. while there might be some uncertainty about how exactly to value it, i cant imagine there would be serious debate about whether information is a thing of value. still, a prosecution along these lines would hardly be straightforward or routine. in the past, criminal cases about solicitation have focussed on cash, so muellers case would rest on a novel interpretation of the law. the status of wikileaks also creates a potential obstacle. federal law contains an exemption for the press; news operations cannot be charged with making illegal campaign contributions by covering a campaign. the trump campaignand surely wikileaks itselfwould likely argue that the organization is a journalistic outlet. its worth noting that president trumps own central intelligence agency has a different view of wikileaks. mike pompeo, the director of the c.i.a., said in a speech in april, its time to call out wikileaks for what it really is: a non-state hostile intelligence service often abetted by state actors like russia.

theres another way in which collusion could be a crimeand its based on the original hack of the e-mails. the computer fraud and abuse act, which was enacted in 1986, prohibits unauthorized persons from obtaining the private electronic information of others, including access to e-mail accounts. if there is an agreement to commit hacking, it doesnt matter if the people in the trump campaign didnt do the actual hackingit just matters that they knew someone else would do it. there just needs to be an agreement that one or more will do it, orin kerr, a professor at george washington university law school and an expert on computer law, told me. they just need to have encouraged the hacking. is the distribution of e-mails stolen by others a crime? what if (as appears to be the case here) the theft of the e-mails took place well before the trump campaign encouraged their distribution? in this case, the law of criminal aiding and abetting, not conspiracy, might be useful for mueller. in most aiding-and-abetting cases, the defendant assists the main perpetrator while the crime is taking placeby, for example, driving the getaway car in a bank robbery. a recent supreme court precedent appears to expand the definition of aiding and abetting to include assistance after the crime has been committed. in rosemond v. united states, the court upheld the conviction of a defendant for aiding and abetting the use of a gun in a drug crime, even though he had no advance knowledge that there would be a gun present at the transaction. what mattered, according to justice elena kagans opinion, was that the defendant has chosen, with full knowledge, to participate in the illegal scheme. there is currently no proof that anyone in the trump campaign encouraged the russians, or anyone else, to hack into their adversaries e-mail accounts for the e-mails that were eventually released. but trump, sr.,s speech and trump, jr.,s e-mails show that they knew that the e-mails had been hacked, and still encouraged their distribution. the c.e.o. of cambridge analytica, the data-analytics firm that worked for the trump campaign, reportedly even reached out to wikileaks in the summer of 2016, asking it for state department e-mails from hillary clinton so that the firm could organize and release them. according to susan hennessey, a former lawyer at the national security agency and now a fellow at the brookings institution, where she studies cybersecurity, rosemond suggests that you can be held liable for the full crime even if you dont know about every single element in advance. in this context, it may mean that the trump-campaign officials can be prosecuted for aiding and abetting the hacking even though they did not know about it when it was done. by joining in the distribution of the hacked e-mails, they aided and abetted the commission of the crime. (journalists and others who publish newsworthy leaked and hacked documents without fear of criminal consequences can do so thanks to first amendment protections.) nonetheless, based on the available evidence, both of these theories of criminal liabilityconspiracy to receive unlawful in-kind contributions from foreigners, and aiding and abetting the hacking of e-mailslook like long shots for mueller. prosecutors tend to be cautious about pursuing criminal cases based on novel legal theories. prosecutors are expected to win every case they bring, and they are risk-averse because they dont want to lose, samuel buell, a former federal prosecutor who is now a professor at dukes law school, told me. they know that in virtually every white-collar case the defense lawyer is going to say to the jury, my client didnt know what he was doing was against the law. so the key evidence in these cases is the proof that the defendants knew what they were doing was wronglike when they destroy documents or lie about what theyre doing. thats what establishes consciousness of guilt. this may be why muellers team has closely investigated the events of july 8, 2017, aboard air force one, after the news first broke of trump, jr.,s e-mails with goldstone and the subsequent meeting with the russian lawyer. on the plane, the president apparently dictated a statement about the meeting that may have been false. the first comments from the white house about the meeting were drafted in part by trump, and asserted that the conversation had focussed on adoption issues, which was misleading at best. if either trump, sr. or jr., lied about the meeting in trump tower, that could suggest they knew that what had occurred in the meeting was a criminal act. sekulow dismisses the possibility of criminal charges based on either unlawful campaign contributions or the aiding and abetting of hacking. im not concerned about these bizarre theories, he told me. there is no basis for saying, under the law or the facts, that any of this behavior during the campaign was criminal. cobb also professes optimism about the resolution of the case, and suggested to me that he thought the mueller investigation, at least as it relates to the white house, would wrap up soon, probably in january of next year. (cobb has made this kind of prediction before, guessing wrongly that the investigation would end by thanksgiving or shortly after. recent news reports suggest that trump, perhaps influenced by cobb, has been telling friends that he thinks mueller will finish his work in the next few weeks.) cobb said that even flynns guilty plea demonstrates again that the special counsel is moving with all deliberate speed, and clears the way for a prompt and reasonable conclusion. the trial of manafort and gates isnt scheduled to begin until next may, so cobbs sense of muellers schedule is likely wishful thinking. on october 30th, the day of the manafort and gates indictment, mueller also revealed that george papadopoulos, a foreign-policy adviser to the trump campaign, had pleaded guilty earlier in the month to lying to f.b.i. agents about his contacts with russia during 2016. aaron zelinsky, one of muellers prosecutors, said in court at papadopouloss guilty-plea proceeding that theres a large-scale ongoing investigation of which this case is a small part. flynns plea and his coperation suggest that when it comes to the final area of the prosecutors inquiry, obstruction of justice, the investigation may be ramping up rather than winding down.

unlike collusion, the crime of obstruction of justice is well established and easy to understand. the law prohibits people from taking actions that would impede the governments search for the truth and doing so with the intent to keep the truth from coming out, fishman, the former u.s. attorney, told me. the issue is at the heart of muellers mandate because a possible obstruction of justicethe presidents decision to fire james comeygave rise to the creation of the special-counsel position in the first place. the crucial issue in the comey firing is whether the president had a corrupt motive for the dismissal. the bakery-to-skinny-people ratio in this neighborhood doesnt make sense. two competing narratives about comeys departure lead to dramatically different conclusions about trumps behavior. the first comes principally from comeys testimony before the senate intelligence committee. comey laid out a damning account of his dealings with trump, starting on january 6th, before the inauguration. by this point, it had been widely reported that the f.b.i. was investigating russian interference in the 2016 campaign, and on that day comey went to trump tower to brief the president-elect about the situation, including the claim, later revealed in the so-called steele dossier, that trump had cavorted with prostitutes in moscow, in 2013. three weeks later, on january 27th, trump invited comey to dinner alone at the white house and asked him if he wanted to keep his job as director. trump then raised the subject of the russia investigation and said, i need loyalty, i expect loyalty. comey said he finessed the request by agreeing to provide honesty, and honest loyalty. three weeks later, trump had the talk with comey in which he pressured him to let flynn off easy, a conversation that now seems especially sinister. on march 30th, trump called comey at the f.b.i. and described the russia investigation as a cloud that was impairing his ability to act on behalf of the country. he said he had nothing to do with russia, and had not been involved with hookers in moscow. he asked comey what the two of them could do to lift the cloud. on april 11th, the president called comey again to ask what the director had done to get out the word that he, trump, was not personally under investigation regarding russia. to all of the presidents requests in these conversations, comey later testified, he replied in as noncommittal a way as possible. the next significant contact with the president was the letter of dismissal comey received on may 9th. comeys account lays out the case that he was fired because he refused to abort the investigation of trumpin other words, that the president had obstructed justice. trumps defense to this claim is based on an alternative, and much shorter, chronology of events. the presidents advocates say he fired comey not to interfere with the investigation of the campaigns ties to russia but, rather, because he thought that the f.b.i. director had mishandled the earlier investigation of hillary clintons e-mail practices. this defense starts with comeys testimony before the senate judiciary committee on wednesday, may 3, 2017. comey was questioned about his decision to reveal, just a few days before the 2016 election, that the f.b.i. had reopened the investigation of clintons e-mails. comey defended his actions, but added, it makes me mildly nauseous to think that we might have had some impact on the election. comeys answers at the hearing outraged trump, and he spent the following weekend at his country club in new jersey drafting a letter of dismissal to comey, with the assistance of his aide stephen miller. (mueller has a copy of the draft, which has not been made public.) the following monday, may 8th, trump showed the draft to donald mcgahn, his white house counsel, and to vice-president pence. also on that day, the president met with jeff sessions and rod rosenstein, who had separately been discussing the advisability of dismissing comey. trump fired comey the next day with a letter that was much shorter than the original draft. rosenstein also released a memorandum purporting to justify the firing on the ground that comey had mishandled the investigation of clintons e-mails. according to this account, there was no obstruction of justice, because trumps reason for firing comey had nothing to do with stopping the f.b.i.s investigation of the president, and everything to do with the clinton matter. the chronology put forth by the presidents defenders omits trumps requests to comey that he limit the f.b.i.s russia investigation, and it doesnt reckon with trumps failure to mention to comey his supposed complaints about the clinton probe. in addition, trumps later actions undermine the exculpatory version of his decision. on may 10th, in a meeting in the oval office with sergey lavrov, the russian foreign minister, and kislyak, the russian ambassador, trump said, i just fired the head of the f.b.i. he was crazy, a real nutjob. i faced great pressure because of russia. thats taken off. the next day, in an interview with lester holt, of nbc news, trump said, of his decision to fire comey, when i decided, i said to myself, i said, you know, this russia thing with trump and russia is a made-up story.  in more recent months, according to a report in the times , the president has also tried to persuade republican senators on the intelligence committee to shut down its investigation into his campaigns ties to russia. in sum, on the basis of the publicly available evidence, the case against trump for obstruction of justice is more than plausible. most perilously for the president, flynn may know what trump has to hide.