one night in april, 1983, an englishwoman, twenty-nine, stepped off a plane at j.f.k. and hailed a cab. she had come to the united states for business, though she would have been hard pressed to say what kind. she already missed her husband and the clatter of his typing back at home. as the cab headed toward manhattan, dr. ruths show blared on the radio. you tek it in the mouth und move it slowly, slowly up und down, the good doctor advised. the woman in the cab was tina brown, and this was her initiation into the world of media in new york. in the years since that spring night, brown has become synonymous with the last great renaissance of american print magazines. at vanity fair and then at the new yorker , she expanded readerships. her editorial appetites were fierce; she raked in news and new writers and cash. some people found her style unsettling, and her victories did little to alter that judgment. browns legacy remains controversial not because her success is in question but because, for some, too much was lost in her kind of success. a chance for reappraisal has now come.  the vanity fair diaries: 1983-1992  (holt) is browns private account of her work at vanity fair for nearly a decade, the editorship often seen as her most dazzling feat. when she took over, less than a year after being blown into new york by dr. ruth, the magazine was tens of millions of dollars in the red, with a circulation of about two hundred and fifty thousand. by the time she left, it had more than doubled its pages of advertising and gained about a million readers. the diaries are a ledger of the workdays in between. that time was filled with famous people, endless parties, comic misadventure. but its browns reports on editing that offer an illuminating thrill. brown calls herself a magazine romantic, and, reading her diary, you see why: she collects old magazines the way some people collect baseball cards, and her entries flutter with the joy of conquest at a time when glossies were reaching a glamorous peak. her narrative is juicy in the mold less of a chophouse steak than of a summer peach: a little tart, a little sweet, mostly refreshing. its pretty irresistible. brown is an entertaining writer of what could be called high magazinese, a prose of front-loaded descriptors and punch-line squibs (from the introduction: large, blond, and ebullient in his well-tailored suits, my father filled a room with his commanding height and broken nose), and, winsomely, she seems to write this way even when writing for herself. she has a novelists sense of pacing and a perverse genius for description. one pompous woman is a coiffed asparagus; an aging lords secretary is a pretty, silent blonde girl with whom he probably enjoys recreational humiliation. walter mondale would make an excellent prime minister of norway, and wallace shawn is like a small, anxious hippo. (there are misses along with the hits, and some descriptionsbill buckley did a pale, sexy, contact-lens stare at meleave the reader not just cold but chilled.) every new york bildungsroman has essentially the same plot. a wide-eyed outsider drifts among the citys urbane and jaded lions with fear and amusement, acutely aware that she is not one of those powerful, entrenched, kind-of-terrible new york people, until, one day, she wakes up and discovers that she is one of those powerful, entrenched, kind-of-terrible new york people. browns version is complicated by a sense of doubleness that she has from the start and never sheds; she indulges a persistent feeling that her true creative life lurks elsewhere. america is too big, too rich, too driven, she writes. america needs editing. and so she starts.

in the twenties, vanity fair , the glossy magazine that rose with dorothy parker and robert benchley, put fizz and tannins in the social ferment of new york. its project soured during the depression, though, and, in 1936, it was folded into vogue . the cond nast company owned both, and worked to relaunch vanity fair early in 1983. the goal was sophistication, but that word has many meanings, and the first editor, richard locke, seems to have envisaged a left bank-style glossy of literature and the arts. the first issues hit newsstands with a thud, and then a rustle of derision. locke was canned. meanwhile, brown was having conversations with the cond nast chairman, s. i. newhouse, jr., and his editorial director, the migr artist alexander liberman. she studied them like fickle gods on olympus; throughout the diaries, her writing about men is noticeably more nuanced and more searching than her portraits of her female peers. i know its the wrong feminist answer, she confesses at one point, but most of my role models have been men. they always had the lives i wanted. brown had spent her childhood in impish misbehavior before emerging, under oxfords spires, as a sort of literary wunderkind. while still at school, she sent a play into production at the edinburgh festival. she was recruited to the new statesman during her time at oxford, and by her early twenties was a busy freelance writer. awkwardly, she fell in love with one of her first editors, harry evans, who was twenty-five years older and married; charmingly, theyve been together ever since. evans taught her the editors craft, she says, and there is more about that than about what she refers to as the  scandale  of their early life. (possibly its not that sort of book, or possibly brown is not that sort of person; of her moment of coup de coeur with evans, she writes, i fell in love with his professional absorption.) in 1979, when brown was twenty-five, she became the editor of tatler , a faded society magazine, and focussed it on the farces of the royal family and on the rising, striving thatcherist world. she wrote much of the copy herself, including, under a pseudonym, a semi-satirical eligible-bachelor roundup. (gregory shenkman is half-russian but wholly available and in a city overrun with effeminate one-shave-a-day men is refreshingly hairy.) in two years, she expanded the magazine from a wan publication with ten thousand subscribers into a glad rag with tens of thousands more. in 1982, it was bought by cond nast, and brown, restless and restive, left. thats when newhouse and liberman called her to new york. at the office and at the four seasons, they talk of vanity fair. but she isnt sure what theyre talking about. alex suggested i make a proposal about what i need to make this work. we need you.  is he offering the editorship? she wants it badly, but cannot bring herself to say so. instead, she flies back to london and offers to consult on the magazine for a couple of months. this leaves her furious at herself. no man would have fled town with a prospective editorship on the table, she writes. although she dislikes working under lockes replacement, the vogue veteran leo lerman, she learns from her vantage inside the magazine and finds new york thrilling: its high-stakes and frightening, which is pretty sexy. (sexy is one of browns favorite words.) as the consultancy ends, she works up the courage to tell newhouse that she wants the editorship. i will do a good, jazzy job for you, si, if you want me, she says. then she goes home and becomes a nervous wreck, wondering whether she let her big break slip away. a doctor she consults suggests that she forget new york and produce children. tina brown at vanity fair in 1990. brown took over the title in 1984, a year after its relaunch, and immediately sought to freshen its mix: the fine balancing and juxtaposition of features. photograph from rex / shutterstock but at last a call comes. brown, who is on christmas vacation, in barbados, flies to new york with her beach clothes. she has just turned thirty. but she knows what she wants to do. her idea of sophistication is urgency, wit, and the eclectic front edge of cultural power. it will be oscar season when her first issue appears, and she notices a new crop of blond actresses coming through. she puts one of them, daryl hannah, on the cover wearing a blindfold, with the line blonde ambition. shes holding an oscar statuette in each hand like a glitzy version of blind justice, which adds another level of double entendre as the fate of the mag weighs in the balance, she tells her diary. if there was another meaning to be found in tina browns naming her first american cover blonde ambition, it does not seem to have occurred to tina brown.

what makes a great editor? the answer is not obvious, because neither is the nature of an editors creative work. some editors-in-chief are micromanagers. others roam. some are dais creatures; many huddle at their desks. the basic task of editing is to serve as a polarized filterto let in light this way and not that waybut good magazine editors do something more: they focus light into a sensibility that comes through on each page. a gq editor knows how his or her readers arent esquires . an editor moving from the american prospect to the nation must recalibrate in taste. you have to be able to throw a magazine on the floor opened to any page and instantly know what magazine youre looking at and who the reader is, a british editor tells brown. she takes it as a standard for vanity fair . magazines can be text-driven, or photo-driven, or headline- and package-driven. what editors focus their attention onwhat they bend and crimp the other elements aroundtransforms accordingly. browns vanity fair was driven by what she calls the mix: the table of contents, the balancing and juxtaposition of features. the endless conundrum of how to get the mix perfect is what keeps me from getting bored, she writes. a mixologist needs an instinct for eclecticism ( this pairing is dull, that one has a kick) and a sensitivity to context. also, a big cutting-room floor. brown famously yanked pieces that didnt suit an issue; at one point, she kills three things because the mix includes an excess of bald heads. people management becomes an issue in this climate. (the diaries heroes are browns managing editor, who manages with sanity and warmth, and the cond nast human-resources head, who makes people problems go away.) yet brown rarely tires of writers, which is impressive, because writers, as a tribe, are strange. they keep odd hours and have weird, often bad ideas. at gatherings, they tend to skulk or to be over-present, like a recently uncrated labrador leaping to lick your nose while piddling on your knees. hollywood is filled with stories of prima-donna actor tantrums, wild affairs, trashed trailers, and overnight benders. rather than erupting in this healthy manner, writers go home and quietly develop suicidal snacking habits, or unnecessary family troubles, or a rash. the upside is that good writers, in their best moments, can conjure from a blank expanse of nothingness something: a text with a shape, a voice, a world, even a personality of its own, able to speak to those its author would consider strangersthe same thing that photographers and illustrators manage in their frames. the novelist william maxwell, a new yorker fiction editor for four decades, used to say that he could play on a writers talent like a piano. browns first bsendorfer in new york is dominick dunne, whom she meets at a dinner during her 1983 visit. he says that he has never written nonfiction, but she knows he has the sound she wants. i asked if hed thought about writing for magazines, she says. the emotion of the night ratcheted up when dominick suddenly revealed to me something terriblehis daughter, dominique, was murdered. hes about to go to los angeles for the trial, and brown encourages him to keep a diaryshed love to publish something, she says. dunne soon becomes a critical part of her mix, along with photographers such as annie leibovitz and helmut newton. a vf formula that works is beginning to finally suggest itself, she writes. celeb cover to move the newsstand, juicy news narrative . . . a-list literary piece, visual escapism, revealing political profile, fashion. if we nail each of these per issue its gonna work. her mixological skill helps her to dash a playful range into a newsstand of carefully channelled readerships. december, 1984: joan collins cover ( she rhymes with rich ); also, muriel spark on piero della francesca, styron on capote. a glance through these issues complicates browns reputation as a forward-looking iconoclast, ripping up the old order for something untested and new: mixology is the oldest practice in the editing of magazinesthe word magazine originally referred to a storehouseand she understands herself predominantly as a restoration gal, peeling away the shag carpet to reveal the parquet floors. when she edited tatler , her models were the piquant tatler of the augustan age and a later, jazz age iteration. at the new yorker , she sought to restore the newsier, jauntier illustrated weekly invented by harold ross. when she started at vanity fair , she cast off the zazzy type and the coffee-table culture writing of seventies cond nast and rembraced the crispness of the twenties magazine. glamorous, irreverent; traditional, fresh. her risky vision was to have something for everybody, but to get the whole to hang together, too.

a reader expecting the steely workings of a brash executive mind will be surprised by browns inner life. she is bookish, uncertain, frequently unaware. when she tries to rent an apartment, she gives five thousand dollars in cash to a con man. shes a self-described introvert who quails at going out and spends a new years eve alone in her apartment. she must remind herself that shes always glad she went to parties. (she gets her ideas there.) she is a balky, fussy writer, once holing up for three days in a hotel room trying to produce a thousand words on henry kissinger. she can often barely stand new york, and thinks she would be happier in california. if she is to stay sane in the city, she decides, shell need to leave on weekends, so she and her husband rent a beach house out in quogue, on long island, and she spends the friday-afternoon rail trips staring dreamily out the window, relishing that lonely sound of the trains honky warning as it rounds the bend. she feels more comfortable in quogue than in manhattan, but, when they scrape together cash to buy the rental house, their mortgage application is rejected. in london, she never thought about money, she realizes. but in new york, despite making much more than she ever has (she is hired at a hundred and thirty thousand dollars, the equivalent of about three hundred thousand today), she frets about it constantly, feels that she never has enough, and finds herself obliged to act as if she had more than she does. a friend calls this the new york disease. she finds it tiring. she longs for english self-effacement, and the days when she could read philip larkin in bed. when a british journalist notes her suit, her coif, and her newsreaders smile, she winces: its a costume, she thinks, an effort to pass. she tells herself that this outer lifethe job, the dinner parties, the united statesis temporary, research for a novel she is going to write. the big question around diaries is always motivation: why? for brown, it becomes clear, the entries are a way of taking all the stuff that flies at you and framing it, weaving a story about an adventitious heroine called tina brown. here i live in a permanent red-hot present, fascinated, appalled, thrilled, amused, enragedbut never ultimately touched, because in the end i am always a spectator and a foreigner, she writes. that look at life from the outside gives the diaries good humor, and it offers brown a kind of armor from herself. she has a healthy, possibly un-american attitude toward daily failuresshe takes them as a cost of playing the gameand records her flops with matter-of-fact dispatch. she blew that crucial advertising meeting. she felt distracted by office politics and was rubbish on tv. that dinner party she gave? a comic disaster. oh, well. it all keeps coming at you anyway. despite her britishness, she is a classic new york workaholic: its not that she adores being in the grind of labor; its that she is devoured by anxiety when shes not. not all things translate. like many europeans, brown concludes that the u.s. has no sense of humor. she is baffled when sally quinn disinvites her from ben bradlees birthday, after a vanity fair review calls quinns new novel cliterature. she recalls a friends impious joke, about the men in the late christina onassiss life, sending brits into conniptions and causing a scandalized american to flee the room. the humorlessness complaint also has an editorial dimension. british editors often seem to hire writers, editors, artists, and photographers with an eye to character and quirk, as if casting an opera buffa: theres the prince, the ingnue, the intellectual, the dame, the dandy, the wit, and the sharp-shooting kid. americans tend to favor well-decorated men and women who make sound and solid points, as if staffing a cabinet. in the diaries, brown chafes against the sanctimony of american newsprint. what i miss here is the surprise of a hollywood splash lighting up a news page or an irreverent headline undercutting a pompous public moment, she laments. there is huge snobbery and hand-wringing here about what serious papers should publish and where writers should write.

by many measures, though, browns eighties world was less rule-governed than the present, and some rascals show their colors early on its schoolyard turf. in june of 1986, brown goes to oxford for a story on the death of a young heiress from a heroin overdose. she hires a student journalist, allegra mostyn-owen, to make introductions. mostyn-owen fobs off brown at a lunch with posh kids and her boyfriend, a young fogey with a thatch of blond hair and a plummy voice called boris johnson. a bit later, the sunday telegraph publishes, under mostyn-owens byline, a snarky account of browns visit, centered on the lunch. brown finds that shes extensively misquotedunsurprisingly, since mostyn-owen wasnt there. boris johnson is an epic shit, brown concludes. i hope he ends badly. she does better with other opportunists. at a dinner party given by ann getty in 1987, she finds herself between the editor lewis lapham and an italian art dealer. nearby is donald trump. ann, for some reason, monopolized lapham for two courses, leaving me and trump both stranded, so he leaned over them and started bombarding me with interest, she writes. tina, he shouted, what do you think of the newsweek cover story on me? i havent read it, i told him. you know, tina, i could have had time . they wanted me and i saw them, too. but newsweek scooped them. who do you thinks better, tina, newsweek or time ?  time , i said mischievously. you really think so, tina, you really think so? his pouty elvis face folded into a frown of self-castigation. i guess it sells more, he said in a tormented tone. i guess it does. then he brightened. you know how much fawn hall gets for a one-night appearance? twenty-five thousand dollars! ive booked her for the night at trump tower. she cant sing. she cant dance. so what. shes so hot everyones gonna come. . . . you see this man, trump, hissed the italian on the other side of me. he is trying to force you to think like him, and i think its working. from then on, our president drifts through browns memoir like a hot-air balloon in search of power lines. vanity fair publicizes the moniker the donald. brown has decided to excerpt his forthcoming book,  the art of the deal , and that choice seems to mark the moment when her foreigners double consciousness sharpens into the shrewd detachment of the age. it feels, when you have finished it, as if youve been nose to nose for four hours with an entertaining con man, she writes. i suspect the american public will like nothing better.

the secret self, the deference to effect, the calculating tasteall these shape a curious growth narrative, a story less about becoming than about appearing to become. is there a difference? its a truism that the worlds of glamour, power, and success are populated with people who think they got in on a fluke and dont belong. as far as creativity goes, though, is that sense of doubleness the static or the sound? the serious subject in the shadows of browns account is the influence of a success economy on creative work. poignantly, it also emerges as a question in the long arc of browns life. its instructive in some ways to look to an old master. joe hagans splendid new biography,  sticky fingers: the life and times of jann wenner and rolling stone magazine  (knopf), lays bare a subject whos notorious for his appetites in commerce and fame. yet wenners flagship publication was also a crucial vector of the counterculture and an early champion of alternative art. is there a contradiction? hagans book is richly sourced, fair-minded, and, helpfully here, attentive to the tricky rapport between individual ambition and the growth of a creative enterprise through time. his underlying idea is that wenner, far from being a flower-child fanboy who struck gold, was a business prodigy who realized that the boomer counterculture was aspirational, and thus salablethat the young people who bought a bus ticket to san francisco, bought a tab of acid, bought jefferson airplane takes off werent really that different from the women who ad-shopped vogue or the cocktail-party pundits who took partisan review . wenner had been largely indifferent to music through his teens, when he was a loud, social-climbing, student-government type. (multiple classmates recall him as obnoxious; at one point, he returned a girlfriends love letters with grammatical corrections.) but he recognized a need. his original insight of 1967 was an abiding one: that the 1960s were, at bottom, a business, hagan writes. jann wenner, the founder and publisher of rolling stone, in the magazines san francisco offices in 1968. wenners magazine would succeed largely by applying a commercial savvy to the energies of the counterculture. photograph by baron wolman / getty rolling stone was not the first rock-criticism magazine; it was preceded by crawdaddy! and mojo-navigator . it struck a nerve, though. early issues, hagan notes, were on newsprint with a trippy logo, but the pieces appeared in clear, crisp columns, a no-frills daily worker for stoned rock fans. this was shrewdness. wenner: what they respond to is somebody talking to them straight. on the newsstand, rolling stone seemed real , man, and yet wenner ran it with establishment concern. he went into business with mick jagger, and then put him on the cover. he let john lennon edit his own interviewthen sold it as a book, without lennons approval. when rolling stone was drowning in debt, in 1970, wenner bailed it out with money from the record labels and then, hagan says, tweaked reviews critical of their stars. as the sixties ended and realness lost its market value, wenner went fancy, reframing rock and roll as a celebrity culture like any before it, hagan writes. all this seems to conspire against the sovereignty of creative freedom and outsider art. heres the thing, though: who has ever read a piece from crawdaddy! or mojo-navigator ? meanwhile, the art of portraiture made strides in the young annie leibovitzs daring rolling stone photos, and  fear and loathing in las vegas  (which rolling stone published), by hunter s. thompson (whom it brought into the footlights), is as genuinely alt a chronicle as exists. in recent years, wenner has expressed nagging anxiety about social media, and it isnt hard to see why. imperial commercial ambitions now cross with an audience and a stage for creative discovery in, for instance, facebook. a periodical can no longer survive just as an object with a table of contents; somehow, it must be first at handon phones, in earbuds, in lifewithout droning like a swarm of bees. going forward, one imagines, visionary digital-age editors will be packagers: those who take this amorphous buzzing explosion, give it a shape, and figure out a way to sell it again as a special box. until then, strong voices, more than strong editors, lead. that hardly seems a good thing for truly creative work. habits of doubleness are inherent in many editors, not just brown. (hagan makes much of wenners long-closeted homosexuality.) it seems to help. although such gatekeepers cater to the market gaze of readers, their aloofness guards them from easy consensus. they exist beyond the groupthink that emerges around voices in a crowd. figures like the sales-minded gallerists who rent the space, draw viewers, set the frames, and put work on the wall tend to be absent from the legends of triumphant outsider artists such as hunter thompson. the editorial servants of a success economy may not be in the game for admirable reasons, but they make it possible for us to learn the work of the people who are.