three summers ago, the playwright sarah delappe attended an exhibition at the new museum called here and elsewhere, which included graphic images from the middle east. the art unnerved her, but so did seeing the first world museumgoers checking their phones and sorting out their evening plans. it just felt like we who were taking in the art were so very far away from the content of it, she said recently. on the train back to brooklyn, she started writing dialogue on her phoneoverlapping chatter about the khmer rouge and tampons. by the time she got home, she had set the scene at a suburban soccer practice, because what could be further away than a bunch of girls warming up on an indoor soccer field?

the resulting play is the wolves, which opened off broadway last fall (while delappe was still in grad school), and has now moved to lincoln centers mitzi e. newhouse theatre, where its been praised for capturing the herky-jerky rhythms of girl-speak. (yeah, i heard she lives in the hills in this, like, yogurt thing with her mom.) delappe, who is twenty-seven and quietly hawk-eyed, had stopped by the field house at chelsea piers, which was cacophonous with the sound of after-school sports classes. she watched the two netted soccer fields from a mezzanine lounge populated by moms on laptops and bored-looking kids hunched over homework. i feel for the siblings, she said, looking around. orphaned by the soccer practice.

down on the field, grade-schoolers were running around in a swarm. theyre at the state of playing soccer where they do a lot of grape maneuvers, delappe observed, which is just staying in a grape cluster and running after the ball. she grew up in reno, nevada, where she played in a recreation league from the age of eight to fourteen, on a team called fusion. there was a girl who always wore a lot of makeup to games, which was sort of controversial, she recalled. i remember there being talk among the parents, which now, looking back, seems incredibly unfair. but she would do this sort of front-handspring roundoff and then do a throw-in with the ballthis incredible showoff move. the teams uniforms were purple, sometimes accented with butterfly clips in their hair. but youre not supposed to wear butterfly clips on a soccer field, because if you get a head injury one can enter your skull. i remember being incredibly afraid of that: butterfly-clip head trauma.

a coach down on the south field was barking, speed, speed, speed! lets go! i appreciate how coachlike that coach is, delappe said. in her fusion days, she had coach ken, who was a teammates dad, a firefighter with flaming red hair and a big handlebar mustache. he was a so-so coach. she remembered the way he said hustle, ladiesthe choice of ladies over girls had a mocking formality, familiar to anyone who was ever forced to play team sports. still, delappe said, its such a great sport to learn as a kid, because when else are you doing anything with your feet?

delappe wrote the play wearing a sports bra, even late at night in her bedroom, as a way of getting into character. to keep up on soccer jargon, she scanned message boards for reviews of cleats and headgear. the shows costume designer later discovered a trove of youtube videos of girls displaying the contents of their soccer bags.  this is a napkin from when ashley had a birthday party and we all had cake,  delappe said, channelling one.  this is my favorite tape. its electric blue. these are my socks. its amazing. as she wrote, she imagined the nine young actors in a circle, going through a series of stretches at the same time with military rigor and precision, with no communication about this supernormal synchronicity of their bodies. i think id describe the style of it as hyper-naturalism, with a ten-degree tilt.

at four-thirty, new teams took the field. i love that kid with the matching headband and socks and soccer jerseythe royal tenenbaum, delappe said, pointing to a kid in colorful stripes. the class was all boys, except for one girl with a blond braid. (i like her pink shin guards.) the class split into a four-on-four scrimmage. the coach yawned. now that the wolves is up and running, delappe said, she feels like a soccer mom, watching the players from the sidelines: i can just come in sometimes and give them orange slices. 