defending confederate monuments became the hobbyhorse of far-right activists. illustration by paul rogers audio: listen to this story. to hear more feature stories, download the audm app for your iphone.

at about eight oclock on august 11th, more than six hundred people, many of them liberal activists, gathered in the still air of st. pauls memorial church, across from the campus of the university of virginia, in charlottesville. over the years, parishioners at st. pauls have debated everything from the vietnam war to the ordination of women. now they were facing something unprecedented and unpredictable: the prospect of a confrontation with the far right. the next day, a coalition of extremist groups, including young men who proudly proclaimed their loyalty to a white-nationalist ideology, planned to hold a rally under the banner of unite the right. their ostensible intention was to protest the citys decision to remove a monument to the confederate hero robert e. lee. charlottesville was expecting as many as a thousand extremists, many of them armed. the activists had been preparing for the rally for months. they had established safe houses, and some were avoiding their own homes. they had rehearsed counter-demonstrations, and several dozen of them, some also armed, had agreed to serve as security for the rest. a coalition of progressive members of the clergy had been holding training sessions; they had been telling one another that people could die. now they had come to the church both for spiritual sustenance and for practical planning. from the pulpit, the philosopher and activist cornel west declared, this is a difficult situationa difficult predicamentbut i simply come to say that i find joy in the struggle for freedom. susan frederick-gray, the president of the unitarian universalist association, said that it was a pivotal moment in our nation. i am here to show up on the side of love. toward the end of the service, cell phones began lighting up in the pews. about five hundred extremists were marching toward the campus, carrying flaming tiki torches that they had been instructed to buy and bring with them to charlottesville. unite the right organizers had told the police about their plans, but even they had not expected so many people. the activists who were providing security outside st. pauls passed word inside that it was not safe to leave. i dont care if youre a food criticyoure not coming back in my restaurant wearing only a sash. the marchers were heading not toward the lee monument, in a small park about a mile away, but toward a slender sculpture of thomas jefferson on campus. they were chanting, you will not replace us! and jews will not replace us! by the time they reached the jefferson statue, about twenty students from the university of virginia had encircled it, locking arms. there were a few police cars parked across the street. at first, the officers watched the standoff but did not intervene. for a few minutes, the two groups shouted slogans and threats at one another. then someone lobbed a flame from a tiki torch toward the statue, and someone else sprayed mace, until finally officers came running and dispersed the crowd. people who had been sprayed with the mace were clutching their eyes. inside st. pauls, seth wispelwey, a minister who helped lead the coalition of progressive clergy, held his seven-year-old daughter, who clamped her arms around his neck. david straughn, a thirty-seven-year-old member of the local chapter of black lives matter, wandered into the churchs library and found himself sitting next to west. this is insane, straughn said. west replied that this was how it had been during the civil-rights era in the south. history seemed to be lurching both backward and forward.

there are seven hundred monuments to the confederacy, most of them in the south, from tampa to charlottesville. some, like the ninety-foot pyramid of granite blocks at hollywood cemetery, in richmond, were built just after the civil war, to honor the dead. but the vast majority were commissioned later, from the end of reconstruction to the present. in 1890, the city of richmond, the former capital of the confederacy, installed a sixty-two-foot statue of lee, the first of five statues that anchor monument avenue. when the statue to lee was delivered, more than ten thousand citizens lined the streets to help pull it into place. monuments to other confederate heroesstonewall jackson, j.e.b. stuart, jefferson davis, matthew fontaine mauryfollowed. throughout the south, statues of confederate heroes and soldiers were placed in public squares and on courthouse lawns. from the nineteen-twenties through the sixties, conservative groups paid for the creation of the confederate memorial carving, of lee, davis, and jackson, on stone mountain, in georgiaa confederate mt. rushmore. four hundred feet above the ground and nearly two hundred feet wide, it marks the site where the ku klux klan was revived, in 1915. the monuments were put up because the former confederacy, the southern states, was allowed full control not only over its storyits memorializationbut its politics, david blight, a civil war historian at yale, told me. it won that by defeating reconstruction, with violence and with politics. its their celebration of their story and their revival and their victory. he added, most of them dont say, its a monument to white supremacy, but it is. the two confederate monuments in charlottesville, bronze equestrian sculptures of lee and jackson, were donated to the city by a local philanthropist, in the nineteen-twenties, and set in the center of small, leafy parks. until the latter years of the obama administration, they were largely overlooked amid the red brick courthouses and churches of downtown charlottesville. then, in june, 2015, dylann roof, a twenty-one-year-old who had immersed himself in white-supremacist ideology, joined a bible-study group in the basement of mother emanuel african methodist episcopal church, in charleston, south carolina, and, in the midst of the discussion, rose from his chair and massacred nine black congregants. on his web site, roof had posted photographs of himself with a confederate flag. he also posted a manifesto: i have no choice. i am not in the position to, alone, go into the ghetto and fight. i chose charleston because it is [the] most historic city in my state, and at one time had the highest ratio of blacks to whites in the country. we have no skinheads, no real kkk, no one doing anything but talking on the internet. well someone has to have the bravery to take it to the real world, and i guess that has to be me. in reaction to the slaughter at mother emanuel, south carolinas republican governor, nikki haley, called for the confederate flag to be removed from the statehouse grounds, and across the country liberal activists began tagging confederate monuments with the words black lives matter. roofs crime forced people throughout the country to reconsider questions of history, honor, and the role of memory in racial politics. charleston was the marker, blight said. everyones positions had to change. in new orleans, mayor mitch landrieu began a campaign to remove four confederate monuments. two years later, as the last of the monuments came down, landrieu delivered a speech in which he explained how he came to believe that they should be removed. a friend had suggested that he consider the plight of black parents trying to explain the presence of a statue of lee to their fifth-grade daughter. in his speech, landrieu asked, can you look into that young girls eyes and convince her that robert e. lee is there to encourage her? the conflict over charlottesvilles confederate monuments began with, among others, a sixteen-year-old girl named zyahna bryant. in march, 2016, bryant, a freshman at charlottesville high school, sent a petition to the city council, asking that the lee statue be removed and lee park be renamed. as a teenager in charlottesville that identifies as black, i am offended every time i pass it, bryant wrote. i am reminded over and over again of the pain of my ancestors and all of the fighting that they had to go through for us to be where we are now. her petition was posted on change.org; several hundred people signed it. wes bellamy, a city council member and computer-science teacher, invited bryant to attend a rally at lee park later that month. she agreed. speaking to a few dozen liberal activists and to a smaller group of counter-protesters, who were waving confederate flags, bryant said, we are in 2016. things have changed, and they are going to change. bellamy and another council member, a writer and activist named kristin szakos, asked the city council, chaired by mike signer, charlottesvilles mayor, to vote to have both monuments removed. signer, a forty-four-year-old democrat with close-cropped hair and a serious mien, is a practicing lawyer. (in charlottesville, the mayoralty is a part-time position.) he studied law at the university of virginia and has a doctorate in political science from berkeley, where he wrote his dissertation on how democracies resist demagogues. signer told me that he was sympathetic to bellamy and szakoss point of view but resisted the idea of removing irritants, as he put it, from public spaces. he lived in fifeville, a historically black neighborhood, and when he asked an elderly woman there what should be done with the monuments she said that they should stay put, so that my grandchildren can know what happened here. signer felt much the same, although he was receptive to ideas on how the statues might be altered. the lee statue could be taken off its pedestal, or surrounded by panes of glass, on which the testimony of one of lees former slaves might be printed. in 1866, a man named wesley norris had described lees reaction to an attempted escape: not satisfied with simply lacerating our naked flesh, gen. lee then ordered the overseer to thoroughly wash our backs with brine. charlottesvilles confederate monuments had been installed undemocratically, when jim crow laws were in effect; now, signer believed, they needed to be reconsidered through a deliberative democratic process. the council appointed a commission of nine prominent citizens to study the issue and to deliver recommendations. signer viewed the commission as a means of conducting a less emotional conversation. the central problem of democracy for nine thousand years has been controlling the passions, he said.

from june to november of last year, charlottesvilles blue ribbon commission on race, memorials, and public spaces held seventeen public hearings. the chair, don gathers, the deacon at first baptist church, a historically black church founded just after emancipation, and the vice-chair, john edwin mason, a professor of african history at the university of virginia, led a largely liberal commission that believed its task was, among other things, to explore charlottesvilles history of slavery and segregation. but the most vocal group at the early hearings was composed of local preservationists; as the ranks of traditional heritage groups, most prominently the sons of confederate veterans, have dwindled, upholding a historically minded pride in confederate heritage has fallen to dedicated individuals. you know, it would be nice if, every once in a while, i got credit for hearing the first part of almost everything you say. at charlottesvilles hearings, the preservationists included lewis martin iii, a fourth-generation resident and the former president of the charlottesville-albemarle bar association. to martin and many of the others, the commission was full of relative newcomers, who saw only race when they thought about charlottesvilles past. the notion that the monuments were about jim crow doesnt get beneath the topsoil, martin told me. the people who were pleased with the erection of the statues in town were my sunday-school teachers, and they werent thinking about slavery or oppression. they were thinking about the veterans of the civil war whom they knew personally, and the generals whom they considered heroes. by the fall of 2016, martin had started calling his group the deplorables plus jane. (jane williamson was the only democrat in the group.) the university of virginia was back in session, and martin found himself battling a faction at the hearings which was demanding that the monuments be removed. jalane schmidt, a forty-nine-year-old religious-studies professor, who was trying to establish the black lives matter movement in the community, was supplementing the work of the commission with some historical research of her own. she found evidence that, several months before the jackson sculpture was unveiled, in october, 1921, hundreds of charlottesville residents had attended a klan ceremony at monticello, the home of thomas jefferson, which included a cross-burning at jeffersons tomb. to schmidt, this left no ambiguity about the purpose of the confederate monuments. they were emblems of white supremacy, she told me. schmidt is wiry and intense, and although she was fond of charlottesville, she was cold-eyed about its politics: people like to think that were this progressive university place. at the end of the day, were just a small southern town. the debate concerning the monuments became increasingly heated. don gathers recalled telling mike signer, the only way youll get me to contextualize lee is if you put up a thirty-five-foot statue of nat turner holding an axe. the controversy spilled outside the commission. in november, jason kessler, a local conservative blogger, began a campaign to unseat wes bellamy, the only black member of the city council. kessler had found that bellamy, a thirty-year-old high-school teacher and a member of the virginia board of education, had a history of making vulgar remarks about gays, whites, and women on twitter. bellamy resigned from the board and from his teaching job, but he kept his seat on the city council. at a council meeting in december, kessler approached the speakers table to denounce bellamy. with his friends filming the encounter, he carried a portable speaker that blasted tom pettys anthem of persistence, i wont back down. in early 2016, charlottesville had seemed evenly divided about moving the monuments, gathers told me. by the end of the year, it was much the same, but convictions on both sides had hardened. in december, the commission delivered a split recommendation to the city council: the lee and jackson monuments could either be moved or transformed in place. on january 17, 2017, the council deadlocked on a proposal to move the monuments. bellamy and szakos supported it, mayor signer and a fourth council member opposed itand a seventy-two-year-old contractor named bob fenwick abstained, because, he said, he believed other programs should take priority. for a week, it seemed that everyone in town was mad at fenwick the fence-sitter. then, in late january, he announced that he would change his vote, to support the proposal. the monument fund, a nonprofit founded by the conservationists, and by the sons of confederate veterans, filed a joint lawsuit to prevent the removal of the monuments, and a judge granted a preliminary injunction in their favor. the formal debate was over; the statues stayed put.

on february 11th, corey stewart, who had launched an insurgent candidacy for the republican gubernatorial nomination, arrived at lee park. he planned to give a speech in defense of the monuments and of virginias heritage. stewart, a forty-eight-year-old lawyer and the chairman of the board of supervisors of prince william county, represented the hard-right populist faction of the party; he had briefly chaired trumps virginia campaign, until he denounced the republican national committee as establishment pukes. stewart had low expectations for the charlottesville event. at the time, i thought, this is just a small, little issue that will probably garner me a few votes, he told me. but he was immediately surrounded by counter-protesters, most of them affiliates of a group called showing up for racial justice. they were yelling, hey hey, ho ho, white supremacys got to go,  he recalled. one of his staffers was streaming the event on facebook live. i knew it was going to go viral and it would become a big issue for my campaign, he said. five days later, stewart appeared at a press conference with kessler. stewart spoke about wes bellamy and his group of thugs and tyrants on the charlottesville city council. kessler went further, saying, of bellamy, he and his ilk have targeted all the founding fathers, philosophers, artists, and other leaders of our glorious western civilization. stewart made the defense of confederate monuments one of the central issues of his gubernatorial candidacy. nothing is worse than a yankee telling a southerner that his monuments dont matter, he tweeted. in the republican primary, in april, stewart came within five thousand votes, just over a percentage point, of beating the more establishment candidate ed gillespie, who had been an adviser to george w. bush. (later, gillespie adopted stewarts defense of the monuments, in a failed effort to revive his campaign against the democrat ralph northam.) stewart, who lives in a restored plantation house in northern virginia, recognized the power of picking up a symbol that liberals had righteously rejected. look, he told me, i can go up and down virginia, i can talk pro-life, and every conservative republican is going to say, yeah, ive heard that, been there, done that. i agree with you, but it doesnt make you different. when i went around virginia and talked about preserving the historical monuments, and the lunacy of taking them down, that generated the same amount of guttural reaction and concern that the pro-life movement generated forty years ago. the monuments are the new social issue of the twenty-first century, stewart said. thats where the passion is now. by this spring, kessler and stewart had helped deliver the defense of charlottesvilles monuments to the widespread white-nationalist movement, which stripped away the euphemisms and the nostalgia in favor of an unalloyed racist rhetoric. brad griffin, the thirty-seven-year-old spokesman for the league of the south, a white-separatist group that participated in the unite the right rally, told me, when i was growing up, they were always saying that the confederacy was about heritage, not hate. they had this whole narrative where the confederacy was this multiracial paradise where hundreds of thousands of black confederates fought for the confederacy. knowing history, i thought this was just ridiculous. in space, no one can tell youre fat. i also spoke with eli mosley, the leader of the white-supremacist group identity evropa. mosley told me that, after trumps election brought more notice to the far right, he and others wanted to shift from an online movement to a real-life one, and charlottesville was aesthetically pleasing. on may 13th, several leading extremistsincluding richard spencer and matthew heimbach, of the traditionalist worker partyaddressed about two hundred and fifty people in front of the jackson statue. what brings us together is that we are white, we are a people, we will not be replaced, spencer said. that night, far-right groups staged a torchlit rally at lee park. mosley said, once the pictures went out, everyone in our movement was kicking themselves that they werent there. it looked cool. by mid-june, a ku klux klan chapter from north carolina had secured a permit to hold a rally in charlottesville in july. kessler, who was increasingly active in far-right circles, had a permit for unite the right, on august 12th. many of the most prominent extremists in the country promised to attend. the liberal faction that had coalesced at the hearings of the monuments commission had, in a sense, been proved right: it had said that the monuments were symbols of white supremacy, and now white supremacists were coming to town to defend them. by early summer, the activistswho included university of virginia faculty and staff, lawyers, and clergyhad begun monitoring the online networks where extremists were organizing unite the right. whenever one of them spotted kessler and his allies having drinks at a restaurant on the downtown pedestrian mall, a group of liberal activists would surround them, chanting loudly to chase them away. some younger faculty members, who felt that their tenure could be at risk, covered their faces with scarves or bandannas. there was shoving, and some arrests were made. we just wanted to let them know we would not put up with white supremacists organizing here, ben doherty, a law librarian, told me. mayor signer believed charlottesville was being trolled, and thought that the activists should ignore kesslers posse. just before the klan rally, in early july, he held a press conference with al thomas, the citys police chief, urging residents to stay home. the irresistible instinct to go and confront can create its own cycle, signer told me. each encounter piled outrage on top of outrage. but more than a thousand liberal activists turned out to surround a few dozen klansmen, and, once the rally ended and the klansmen had boarded their bus for the drive back to north carolina, the police fired tear gas to disperse the crowd. twenty-two liberal activists were arrested, but no klansmen, and some of the activists grew hostile toward the police. the cops became the klan in that moment, seth wispelwey, the local minister, told me. the temperature rose again. the day before the unite the right rally, signer sent his three-year-old twins to stay with a family friend outside town, as a precaution.

the rally was scheduled to take place on saturday, august 12th, at noon, but a crowd had gathered beneath the lee statue well before 9 a . m . most of the extremists were staying out of town, so they met at points a few blocks away and then walked toward the statue in phalanxes, chanting. the liberal activists had held a sunrise service at a downtown church, and from there about twenty clergy had proceeded to lee park, followed by news cameras. cornel west was among them, and he told me that the extremists were shouting at him. i hadnt seen that kind of raw hatred up close coming from so many people, he said. that was the distinctive feature. at first, the clergy stood on market street, the only side of the park not cordoned off by the police. wispelwey, watching the young men file into the park, noticed the sticks and shields they carried, but also how few of them looked old enough to shave. members of the clergy moved to a small set of stairs and, in an effort to block the entrance to the park, locked arms. they held their position for half an hour. then a contingent from the league of the south appeared, with military veterans at the front, and forced its way through. for the rest of the morning, fights kept breaking out on market street. by 10 a . m ., a group of black-clad members of antifa had taken positions alongside the clergy. sallies of eight or ten men emerged from the park periodically, to yell at them and try to provoke an attack. about a dozen men, wearing camouflage and carrying long rifles, patrolled the scene. hundreds of police officers were on duty in charlottesville that day, but, as the extremists and the activists clashed, they did little to intervene. (the charlottesville police department declined to comment on the days events, citing an active lawsuit.) just before noon, governor terry mcauliffe declared a state of emergency, and police officers with bullhorns ordered everyone to disperse. but the crowd was slow to respond, and the scuffles along market street continued for about half an hour. ben doherty said, smoke was everywhere, bottles were being thrown. it felt one step away from a brawl. there were hundreds of them marching by. some of the extremists were focussed on getting out, but others still wanted a confrontation. finally, the counter-protesters pushed south, farther downtown, as some of the extremists headed north, toward another park. the mood among the counter-protesters was boisterous. it was kind of a good feeling, doherty told me. a lot of people felt like we had defended the cityit was ours. david straughn was in a crowd at water street as it turned onto fourth street, heading toward the pedestrian mall, at the center of downtown. it was like we were going to do a little victory lap, he said. when he heard an engine revving, he thought that it might be a van parked in front of him. then i hear buh-buh-buh-bump , straughn said, and he saw a gray car that had just plowed through the crowd. straughn could see that the cars front fender had fractured, and that it had caught a woman, heather heyer, by the leg. the driver reversed, pulling out of the crowd, and, as he did, he dragged heyer a few feet before she fell off, in front of straughn. there was a large, open wound across her thigh. his instinct was to move her, but he feared that he would worsen her condition. it took me a good six seconds to yell medic!  he said. then straughn started running up fourth street, chasing the car, shouting gray dodge challenger! an armored vehicle, a bearcat, rolled toward him. people who had been hit by the car lay on the ground. medics and clergy rushed toward them. straughn turned back toward the wounded, too, looking for his people. itll have to be your place. i airbnbd myself out of my apartment tonight. heyer died, and nineteen others were injured. james alex fields, jr., the twenty-year-old white nationalist who was driving the car, was arrested and charged with second-degree murder. a police helicopter that had been monitoring the rally crashed outside town, killing two officers. activists retreated to safe houses, the extremists to cars and hotels. later, mayor signer announced that he had changed his position on the monuments. the violence had added a poisonous envelope around them, he told me, and lee and jackson would have to come down. the preservationists lawsuit prevented the immediate removal of the statues, but city workers covered them with black tarps.