in march, 1893, john galsworthya product of harrow and oxford who had recently passed the english bar examwas boarding the passenger ship torrens, in port adelaide, when he noticed a small man with black hair boisterously loading cargo. in a letter home, a month into the voyage, he described a capital chap, polish, somewhat odd-looking, with a fund of yarns on which i draw freely. galsworthys sister credited this encounter with turning him away from the law. by early 1897, galsworthy had assembled a book of short stories, and his polish friend, who had engineered a midlife career change of his own from british seaman to english novelist, under the name joseph conrad, was writing to edward garnett, who worked as a publishers readera sort of grand scoutasking him to look out for a manuscript by my literary! friend. mostly, though, the favors travelled in the other direction. for the next couple of decades, galsworthy served as conrads consiglierelobbying the royal literary fund (no living writer of english, to my mind, better deserves support), fielding conrads queries about his sons education (i am sending you the prospectus to look at), playing  in between man during a dispute with the agent j. b. pinker (conrad asks me to ask you to write to him). one of galsworthys greatest acts of service came in 1913, after the publisher frank nelson doubleday invited conrad to lunch, in london, and proposed purchasing his existing american copyrights and reprinting his books. conrad welcomed the idea, but, fearing it wouldnt come off, asked galsworthy if he could write to his friend alfred a. knopf, the doubleday, page employee who, in conrads words, had formulated this plan of taking me up.  knopf was twenty years old and brimming with ideas for remedying the outrage that a great writer could fail to command a large audience. among his promotional schemes was an illustrated pamphlet, a press release parading as an essay. on receiving word from galsworthy, he sent conrad an effusive letter along with an aging, error-strewn ten-page typescript entitled joseph conrad, which he had found somewhere and was gutting for information. conrad read the typescript carefully, and made numerous amendments and additions. the southern province of poland, where he was born in 1857, was ukraine. his father, apollo, a poet and translator, and his mother, ewa, had been exiled to vologda, not siberia, for their support of polish nationalism. (apollo had marked conrads birth with a poem entitled to my son born in the 85th year of muscovite oppression.) when he was orphaned, at the age of eleven, he was taken care of by his mothers brother. conrads first voyages, in his late teens, had been to the gulf of mexico and the mediterranean. then he joined an english steamernot a war vesselbound for the sea of azov (not the bosphorus). where the notes on me, in his phrase, had mentioned a trip to pacific waters, conrad explained that after becoming a master in the english merchant marineand a british citizenhe spent much of the eighteen-eighties in the east, organizing steamers out of singapore, then commanding the bark otago. the torrens, he wrote, had been a sort of swan-song. but knopf wasnt just asking for help with facts. he was granting conrad a collaborative role in telling his own storythe selection of detail, the fixing of emphasis. in the finished pamphlet, which closely follows conrads responses and his memoir,  a personal record  (conrad sent knopf a copy), his sea career is presented as virtually a hiatus between an eighteen-sixties childhood spent in prodigious feats of reading and the moment when he started writing almayers folly (1895). even conrads taste for the sea is pegged partly to a literary sourcehis fathers translation of hugos toilers of the sea, which he read aloud, from beginning to end. a synopsis of conrads life at sea that begins he had been to the corners of the earth culminates in he had read widely in english and french. conrad objected to being defined as the greatest sea-writer, and knopf instead celebrated a man who has attained a distinction as a master of the art of fiction as great as that of any living writer. thanks to galsworthys intervention, conrad became a best-selling doubleday author, but knopf quit the company soon afterward, leaving conrads work with those who hadnt been so closely coached. in 1916, conrad received the galleys for a uniform edition of his work. its name was the otago, the emblem a sailing ship. returning the pages to doubleday, he explained that he wanted to avoid all reference to the sea, and added, i am something else, and perhaps something more, than a writer of the seaor even of the tropics.

in a limited sense, conrad was simply stating what he considered to be a fact. as he put it not long before his death, in 1924, and exaggerating only a little, in the body of my work barely one tenth is what may be called sea stuff. things get a little shakier when you reach the bit about the tropics. with few exceptions, most notably his novel about anarchists in late-victorian london,  the secret agent  (1907), his stories unfold in asia, africa, and south america. but then conrad was really talking aesthetics, not arithmeticand making, or not quite making, an argument about how he treated his settings. it had taken him a little while to find his favored route to abstraction. in his great novella,  the nigger of the narcissus  (1897), about a sailor who refuses to accept that he is dying, the material worldthe sailors forecastle, the london streetsis solidly present and correct. as alan h. simmons explains in his new scholarly edition, part of cambridges complete printing of conrads works, the novelist distinguished between writers who treat the sea as simply a stage and writers in whose work the sea represents a factor in the problem of existence. the nigger of the narcissus  straddles the border. the ship is a setting as well as a symbol, a microclimate as well as a microcosm. but its possible to see conrad chafing at the constraints of realist storytelling in his use of philosophical digressionand hinting at future priorities in the books final paragraphs, which shift from a collective viewpoint with moments of omniscience, a we that behaves like a he, to an unabashed first person: i never saw one of them again. next came the breakthrougha startlingly original narrative voice that not only severed conrads fiction from realism but questioned the idea of a consensual reality. in january, 1898, the month after the nigger was published, conrad wrote the story youth, introducing the forty-two-year-old merchant seaman charles marlow, who recalls his maiden voyage to eastern seas. defined by his creator as a mere device . . . a whispering daemon,  marlow is more specifically a vehicle for exploring the perspectival nature of human affairsthe idea that, for example, the indian ocean has no stable essence or identity beyond the excitement it inspires in one excitable twenty-year-old sailor. recalling the judea, the bark on which he served as second mate, marlow says that, to him, it was not an old rattle-trap but the endeavour, the test, the trial of life. youth is what marlow saw with and what he saw. places tell us about the people who visit and inhabit them. cant we go five minutes without you checking your flower? marlow doesnt celebrate the role played by passion or prejudice in our descriptions of the world; its just something he acknowledges. in conrads next marlow story,  heart of darkness  (1899), set in an unnamed colony whose rulers talk exclusively in propagandist falsehoods, marlow is the one person willing to call a rattletrap a rattletrap. coming upon a group of natives labelled enemies, he identifies men who were nothing but black shadows of disease and starvation, lying confusedly in the greenish gloom. but bafflement is futile. the world has been rewritten in accordance with the white mans vocabulary. what he says goes. conrads theme is familiar from countless earlier writers, notably flaubert, who in  madame bovary  and  sentimental education  measured the gulf between fact and fantasy. but, where flaubert adopted an air of superhuman detachment, conrad insures that marlows position is itself relativized. though clearly conrads alter ego and even mouthpiece, marlow is not the narrator of youth and heart of darkness but a yarn-spinner described by a member of his audience. everything he says comes pinched between inverted commas. the uncertainties are multiplied in  lord jim  (1900), conrads first full-length novel using this method. it concerns the spiritual odyssey of a young water clerk, drawn to the sea by light holiday literature, who abandons a sinking passenger ship called the patna. the story, mostly delivered as a dinner-table anecdote, has been cobbled together from marlows own impression of jimat the patna inquiry and during the warm friendship that followedand from the reminiscences of various bit players, including the dying mercenary gentleman brown and an elderly french lieutenant whom i came across one afternoon in sydney, by the merest chance, in a sort of cafe. but the witnesses, far from helping him to get at the truth of anything, only reinforce marlows sense that there are as many ship-wrecks as there are menlogic that holds not just for belief and thought and conviction but also for the visual aspect of material things. although lord jim departs from the previous marlow tales in its use of an authorial narrator, the novel opens with this putative gods-eye view unable to determine whether jim is one or two inches under six feet. (in the nigger of the narcissus,  we are left in no doubt that james wait is six-three.)

reading conrad today, its easy to see why he struggled to explain what he was up to. i am modern , he declared, in 1902. but his intentions became more intelligible in light of newer words and later work. the treatment of knowledge as contingent and provisional commands a range of comparisons, from rashomon to richard rorty; reference points for conrads fragmentary method include picasso and t. s. eliotwho took the epigraph of the hollow men from heart of darkness. (that book would have played the same role in the waste land if ezra pound hadnt objected.) even henry jamess late period, that other harbinger of the modernist novel, had not yet begun when conrad invented marlow, and jamess earlier experiments in perspective (the spoils of poynton,  what maisie knew ) dont go nearly as far as lord jim. looking back at the new form he had created, conrad said that he kept it up only because it was essentially mine. that could suggest complacency, but during the spectacular decade and a half that followed lord jim his storytelling underwent a series of revisions. marlows duties were given to other characters, such as morrison, an englishman adrift in what is now indonesia, who reconstructs the story of the reclusive heyst, in  victory  (1915); and the shadowy teacher of languages, in  under western eyes  (1910), who provides an enticing, if ultimately rather cryptic, tour of the russian community in geneva. in  nostromo  (1904), conrads portrait of an invented south american republic, and the secret agent, the combined roles of the narrator and marlow are assumed by a restless third-person intelligence that floats through the fictional world, jumping about in time, picking up one perspective, then another. the device that conrad called irony persists across these variations. at one level, the word simply describes his dramatic method, in which the reader knows more than any single character. but conrad also adopted a broader ironic stancea sort of blanket incredulity, defined by a character in under western eyes as the negation of all faith, devotion, and action. through control of tone and narrative detail, as well as some fairly overt nudging, conrad exposes what he considered to be the navet of movements like anarchism and socialism, and the self-serving logic of such historical but naturalized phenomena as capitalism (piracy with good p.r.), rationalism (an elaborate defense against our innate irrationality), and imperialism (a grandiose front for old-school rape and pillage). to be ironic is to be awakeand alert to the prevailing somnolence. in nostromo, a novel full of people getting carried away, we are invited to admire the journalist martin decoud for ridiculing the idea that people believe themselves to be influencing the fate of the universe. (h. g. wells recalled conrads astonishment that i could take social and political issues seriously.) what saves conrads work from coldness and nihilism is his embrace of an alternative ideal. if irony exists to suggest that theres more to things than meets the eye, conrad further insists that, when we pay close enough attention, the more can be endless. he doesnt reject what marlow calls the haggard utilitarian lies of our civilisation in favor of nothing; he rejects them in favor of something, some saving truth, some exorcism against the ghost of doubtan intimation of a deeper order, one not easily reduced to words. authentic, self-aware emotionfeeling that doesnt call itself theory or wisdombecomes a kind of standard-bearer, with impressions or sensations the nearest you get to solid proof. marlow may be just another partial observer, another myopic pair of eyes, but he knows what he is, so we trust his sincerity about the glamour he found in the east, or the depth of his engagement with jims fate: he swayed me. i own to it, i own up. the occasion was obscure, insignificantwhat you will: a lost youngster, one in a million . . . an incident as completely devoid of importance as the flooding of an ant-heap, and yet the mystery of his attitude got hold of me as though he had been an individual in the forefront of his kind, as if the obscure truth involved were momentous enough to affect mankinds conception of itself. its an article of faith among conrads biographers that the stiff-backed, sure-footed galsworthy, the socially conscious author of  the forsyte saga and the recipient of the 1932 nobel prize in literaturecould not possibly have understood his friends writing. but an essay he wrote in 1908, joseph conrad: a disquisition, remains one of the sharpest accounts of conrads use of perspective. the editors of the nine-volume collection of conrad lettersan amazing achievement, overseen by laurence daviessuggest that conrad liked the essay because it praised him. but he may have felt a deeper satisfaction in reading of the way he had used the cosmic spirit to escape his sense of how small and stupid, how unsafe and momentary, solution is.

joseph conrad: a disquisition is a special case of privileged-access criticism: galsworthy was aware of his friends intentions. more common were the reviews and articles that drew on knowledge of conrads lifeto this day, the dominant mode of commentary on his work.  the dawn watch: joseph conrad in a global world  (penguin press), by the historian maya jasanoffthe latest example of this approachproceeds from a vision of conrad as belonging to the vanguard, though less as a writer than as a man. he may not have known the word globalization, jasanoff says, but he embodied it. she acknowledges the heros service performed by the literary historian norman sherry, who wandered the globe in pursuit of conrads sources, and her chapter on lord jim shows how conrad closely tracked a true tale that he would have heard while working in singaporethe case of a sailor who leaped with the captain and crew from the passenger ship jeddah. but the biographical habit, once acquired, can prove hard to shake. at one point, jasanoff tries to celebrate nostromo, a novel set on a continent conrad didnt know, as a declaration of independence from his past. it proves a strange kind of independence when you reach jasanoffs formula for how the novel was written: poles into italians; steamships into trains, telegraphs, and more steamships; ivory into silver. a novel about a place conrad had never been soon becomes a novel about every place hed been. and, owing to the way jasanoff has structured her book, giving the order of the real-life events that inspired conrads books precedence over the dates of their composition, we have already seen him back in captivity, writing the secret agent, a novel that recalled his time as a young foreigner in london, and mapped the contours of his early life in its portrayal of mr. verlocs family setup. conrads fiction is also pushed about by jasanoffs historical emphases. although she defends conrad against the charges of imperialist collusionlevelled most quotably by chinua achebe, who excoriated him as a bloody racistshe says that patusan, the island where jim finds refuge from his disgrace, reflects nineteenth-century stereotypes of the orient as a realm of faith and superstition, harboring the kind of authenticity that the west had long since abandoned. yet in the novels symbolic structure patusan represents something richer and vaguer, a refuge from places where events move, men change, light flickers, life flows in a clear stream. that isnt the eastits the world. patusan is really a tailor-made nowhere land, the site of pure exercises of the imagination. but then conrads own ideas are slighted in jasanoffs account. the epigraph for the dawn watch comes from victory, when the sinister mercenary jones tells heyst, i am the world itself, come to pay you a visit. you can see why jasanoff didnt quote the amendment: if you prefer a less materialistic view, i am a sort of fate. the less materialistic view is what jasanoff is trying to avoid. at times, she resembles ossipon, in the secret agent, who tells the professor, you are too transcendental for me. she writes that conrad veiled his meaning in imprecise adjectives like inscrutable, and that, in his purplest patches, he presented the sailing ship as a meeting place of the human and the supernatural. but virtually all conrads work unfolds along roughly that borderline, and those adjectives provide the ideal means of describing the obstacles to crossing over. jasanoff appears to accept conrads multiplicity (any great writer generates lots of interpretations and reactions) while remaining firmly convinced that her own approach is the one he would have sanctioned. she suggests that conrad saw his books as a record of his life in the wide world, and claims that he gave his blessing to articles by critics like richard curle about his early travels and their influence on his work. thats hard to reconcile with the letter conrad wrote, in 1894, asking his publisher not to identify the berau as the basis for the pantai river, in almayers folly, or his response to curles 1921 essay, joseph conrad in the east: i think i have given you already to understand the nature of my feelings. indeed, i spoke to you very openly expressing my fundamental objection to the character you wished to give to it. . . . it is a strange fate that everything that i have, of set artistic purpose, laboured to leave indefinite, suggestive, in the penumbra of initial inspiration, should have that light turned on to it and its insignificance (as compared with i might say without megalomania the ampleness of my conceptions) exposed for any fool to comment upon. . . . didnt it ever occur to you, my dear curle, that i knew what i was doing in leaving the facts of my life and even of my tales in the background? conrad never denied that his writing was autobiographical, but he used the word in a specific connection. youth was exact autobiography, in his phrase, only insofar as the experiences it depicted had been filtered through his temperament, or the medium of my own emotionsand that went for the outward coloring, too. when he said that his life in the wide world could be found in his books, he was promising only an emotional record. what he really learned as a sailor was not something empiricalan assembly of places and eventsbut the vindication of a perspective he had developed in childhood, an impartial, unillusioned view of the world as a place of mystery and contingency, horror and splendor, where, as he put it in a letter to the london times , the only indisputable truth is our ignorance. writing replaced seafaring as his means of confronting this state of affairs.

but conrad has also been the beneficiary of much tactful and sympathetic reading, especially in america. whos mencken? he asked knopf, in 1913. he doesnt seem to be afraid of lashing out right and left in the field of literature. the literary critic of the smart set had been a good friend to his prose, as conrad wrote in a letter to mencken himself, expressing the pleasure of a writer who sees himself understood. mencken was one of the earliest in a line of american readers to recognize how conrad conjured up the general out of the particular. among those who caught his conrad bug was f. scott fitzgerald, who, after some resistance, conceded in 1920 that this fellow was pretty good after all. writing to mencken five years later, as the author of the great gatsby, he complained that he had been omitted from a list of conrad imitators: god! ive learned a lot from him. what fitzgerald learned, principally, was a mode of narrationthe damaged overreacher, as recalled by his wonder-prone, meaning-seeking sometime sidekick, a seasoned listener. first of all, stop calling them wishes. thats loser talk. well call them goals.  since fitzgerald, dozens of american writers have confessed to similar debts, among them william faulkner, william burroughs, joan didionand philip roth, whose alter ego nathan zuckerman, having provided a marlow-like window on swede levov, ira ringold, and coleman silk, in the american trilogy, wanders through its coda, exit ghost, carrying a copy of  the shadow-line  (1917). the nested structures of novels as different as  my life as a man  and  the counterlife  reveal a debt to conrads form; and roths final novel,  nemesis , about a teacher who abandons a polio-ridden schoolyardan episode reconstructed decades later by one of his former studentsis undoubtedly a lord jim tale. the most conradian novelist in recent american literature, however, was saul bellow. in his nobel prize lecture, in 1976, bellow recalled that as a contrary undergraduate, at the university of chicago, he enrolled in a class on money and banking and then spent his time reading the novels of joseph conrad. (thomas pynchon, studying at cornell in the fifties, was contrary in his own way: he skipped a class on some of conrads stories in order to read the whole of conrad.) bellow said he had never had reason to regret thisand why would he? all those decades later, he was quoting conrad in a nobel speech, teaching conrad as a chicago professor, borrowing from conrad in his novels. its only a little reductive to say that bellow spent the first half of his career describing himself and the second half describing his friends. starting in 1975, with  humboldts gift , he wrote a series of conrad-like novels and stories about people he had known, as he had known them. in the bellarosa connection, he went all the way, employing a frame narrator (i got it in episodes, like a hollywood serial). but bellow borrowed more than a narrative method. no reader of his late work can fail to hear a similar abrupt oracular tone in the opening of the shadow-line. (only the young have such moments. i dont mean the very young. no.) admirers of the description of humboldt with a pretzel (his lunch) must accept its origin, in the secret agent, as the professors half-eaten raw carrot (his breakfast). the narrator of humboldts gift shares marlows first name and sounds like him, too, when he describes himself groping, thrillingly and desperately, for sense. american academic criticism has always been open to conrads questing side, with the contributions of j. hillis miller probably being the most potent and agile. now john g. peters, the leading american conradianwho plugged a glaring gap with his essential study,  conrad and impressionism  (2001)has co-edited a collection of millers essays, published in a series of books between 1965 and 2015. roughly halfway through that time span, miller served a stint as president of the modern language association. in his address to the 1986 convention, in new york, miller bemoaned the shift away from literary interpretation toward history, culture, society, politics, among other things. so the collections title,  reading conrad  (ohio state), is a pointed one. it would be hard to imagine two conrad fans less alike than j. hillis miller and maya jasanoff. perhaps to minimize thematic repetition, peters and his fellow-editor jakob lothe have omitted millers most fiery challenge to the mainstream of conrad studiesthe preface that he wrote in counterpoint to a collection of essays emphasizing topical resonances. in one piece collected in reading conrad, miller notes that the temptation to compare a work of literature with its background facts  is almost irresistible, but he insists that the details uncovered by norman sherryabout the jeddah inquiry, for instancecannot serve as a point of origin from which to judge lord jim. for miller, no point of origin exists even within the novel:  lord jim is like a dictionary in which the entry under one word refers the reader to another word which refers him to another and then back to the first word again, in an endless circling. it might be observed that this description suspiciously coincides with the tenets of millers favored critical mode, but then, even more than globalization, conrad anticipates the modern phenomenon known as deconstruction. still, the dawn watch and reading conrad have one area of overlapan almost complete indifference to everything that conrad published after 1910. its surprising that neither gives more space to under western eyes, a novel crowded with enigmas and transmuted personal history. but to ignore  chance  (1914) is to miss a crucial clue about conrads sensibilityand his aversion to what he saw as the sea stigma.