decades ago, when the brazilian movie actor fernanda torres was eighteen, she starred in what she recently described as the worst king lear ever, a production that took place in a shopping-mall theatre in rio de janeiro. as cordelia, she had one long scene, and then i would have to wait two hours to die. for the first few nights, she kicked around backstage and played pinball. later, she gave up and went home to have dinner with her handsome new husband. and, when i came back, all my colleagues were still on that stage, playing king lear! and then i just started laughing. for the monthlong duration of the plays run, the teen-age torres was laughing dead, i was laughing alive. i couldnt control it. her fellow-actors tried being stern, they tried pleading, but it was hopeless. reverence had been replaced with absurdity. acting is something very delicate, she said. its a child playing, you have to be playing, if you step one inch to the side its ridiculous and youll be lost.

english stage actors have a term for breaking character like this, specifically for the childlike attacks of giggles that strike when one is meant to be playing it straight: corpsing. the words blend of the morbid and the hysterical capture the events and mood of  the end , a riotous, sex-stuffed novel by torres, which takes technicolor pleasure in detailing the deaths of five incorrigible old beach bums of the bossa nova generation. in her home country, where torres is a huge star best known for her role on the sitcom tapas & beijos (slaps & kisses), on which she plays a single woman working in a bridal store, the end has sold over two hundred thousand copies. it has also made torres a dbut novelist at the age of fifty. on a recent visit to new york, shortly after the publication of the english-language edition, she seemed delighted by this situation. she explained that writing a book about death did not much change how she thought about her own mortality. what this book gave me was a feeling of being able to write at the age of forty-eight. so its the opposite: it gave me a new life.

she was spurred by an interest in the last five minutes of someones life, rather than their death itself. what will you remember? who knows. what is a good life? depends on how you diethats how you really know what kind of life you had. her five men, whom she kills off in reverse chronology, are united by male allegiance, women, and the beach, in that order. we begin with alvaro, the last to die, a morose, once cuckolded accountant who cant stand his grandkids, regrets every pet he had, and leaves this world while crossing the street: hes mown down by his neighbor, the heartless witch from 704. silvio, the penultimate death, is an exhausting hedonist whose death notice, written by his son, confidently denounces an ill-famed father, unfaithful husband, abominable grandfather and disloyal friend. his son adds, i apologize to everyone who, like me, suffered affronts and insults, and invite you to his much-awaited internment. the band is joined by ribeiro, an eternal adolescent whose hobbies include seducing virgins at the beach, and the unhappily married neto, the best and most boring of the lot. finally, there is ciro, the groups idolized adonis, a man so smooth that he dives to pluck lobsters from the ocean for his lady loves. he also proves to be the most reprehensible of the five.

interwoven with these monologues are the stories of the wives, children, mistresses, and sex workers who suffer these men in all their excesses, jealousies, and misdemeanors. torres described the book to me as the epitaph of the machoits funny as hell and at the same time its terrible! at alvaros funeral service, for example, a disillusioned priest, who, after presiding over too many funerals, feels himself to be gods undertaker, experiences his own version of corpsingnot laughter but something worse. weary and bitter, he kicks open the door, strides into the room and, to the aghast congregation of mourners awaiting spiritual consolation, he bellows, whos next?

that question now has a timely, uneasy resonance, as we try and resist the morbid guessing game of which famous and powerful man will follow weinstein, spacey, and others in falling from grace. with america undergoing a mass reckoning with male sexuality, a novel like this feels both taboo and gleeful, a guilty kind of reprieve. my people are hedonists from rio, but they are sweet flowers compared to trump, torres said. the central and most colorful event within the lifelong friendship of these five men is an orgy, and, as in a pirandello play, its relayed to us through multiple perspectives. the behavior of everyone involved is bad, heedless, and rendered with gusto. i always find it interesting how men like to be with each other, torres said with good humor. men like to grab each other, they are fond of each other! this is the subject of the book, male friendship, and an orgy is a way of being with your pals, with your guys, and thats why the orgy scene is the center of the whole thing.

many female american actors have found the courage, in recent weeks, to hold accountable the men whove wronged them. torres, who grew up in a matriarchal household, as the daughter of the oscar-nominated actress fernanda montenegro and the actor fernando torres, understands herself to be an exception in terms of her experience of male oppression within her profession. ive never experienced any situation where i felt afraid, or obliged to accept a producer, actor, or directors approach. i was in charge of my life and had freedom to choose, she said, adding, of course ive dealt with machismo in my life, but i always felt that i was the one who should liberate myself. but this is dangerous to say, because its like saying women are blamed for their oppression. so we are living in a very delicate time. she continued, i dont feel like a woman being oppressed by men. i dont fear writing under the skin of men. i adored writing in the skin of men. to write under the skin of a man just released me from myself. fiction by women that includes a female narrator is often assumed to be autobiography, she explained. so doing it through a man, or five men, it was wonderful! i wrote very freely about those bad-behaviored men. then she added, with a wide smile, but i took a great pleasure in killing them.