lets say youre in the mattress-disruption business. well, no one said it would be easy. youve got a fleet of competing disrupters, breathing their friendly, one-word monikers down your neck: leesa , keetsa , nectar , helix , lull . youve got cooling latex, hundred-day trial periods, white-glove delivery service, and gel memory-foam layers set up like detonation devices all over the crowded landscape of sleep. close your eyes for a second, and bam! disrupted again.

what does a disrupting mattress look like? usually, it comes in a box, shipped direct from an online retailer (the middleman has no place in the disrupted ecosystem), and expands, silently, when exposed to air. an early entrant in the disruption game was casper, a new york-based startup, which began three years ago by offering a one-style-sleeps-all mattress and has since rolled out pillows, sheets, duvets, a dog mattress (a hundred and twenty-five dollars, for pups up to thirty pounds), and now a magazine called woolly .

we knew there was a huge problem and opportunity in the mattress space, neil parikh, a co-founder and the c.o.o. of casper, said the other day. you walk into a corner mattress store, there are commission salespeople wearing suits, and its gross. before casper, parikh said, he and his partners found themselves in a sleepless work culture that rewarded the insomniac. we were working a hundred hours a week on our last companya consignment web sitei was taking naps on beanbags. a nightmare. but then theres this whole health movement going on. were drinking green juice, going to soulcycle. it was a convergence of these things that created the casper vision.

parikh is inclined to think big, california king big. there are a lot of people trying to figure out how to take on big mattress. with casper, he said, hed hoped to change how people feel about their sleep and to empower them to live a better life. he went on, our aspiration is to be like a nike, you know, that stands for a much higher purpose.

on a recent thursday morning, a handful of well-rested individuals gathered at caspers headquarters, just north of union square, for a meeting about woolly (a tagline: get comfortable). the magazines first issue lay on a glass table, near a whiteboard with the words pillow? duvet scrawled on it. a row of empty nap pods stood nearby.

john devore, woollys editor-in-chief and a new york post alum, was wearing a pink shirt, nikes, and steel-rimmed glasses. he opened the magazine to a feature titled comfort pants nation. it was accompanied by an illustration of the statue of liberty, lounging in sweatpants. this is a call to action, by a writer who wants people to celebrate their comfort pants, he said. he turned the page. this is hopefully a regular featureits called ask a grandma. and im a sucker for service journalism, so this writer went out and wrote a skeptics guide to crystals. 

woolly is caspers second publishing venture, after the sleep web site van winkles. (sweet dreams, van winkles: casper put it to bed last month.) it was a sleep vertical, lindsay kaplan, caspers vice-president of communications and brand engagement, said. she wore a gray tunic and had long auburn hair. van winkles featured exclusively sleep-centric content (scientists discovered sleep in jellyfish, polyamory and the social politics of sleep), but woolly takes the broader ideals of wellness and comfort as its remit.

were branching out to even more items, kaplan said. on the bed, below the bed, around the bedroom. woolly feels like our first foray off the bed and onto the nightstand.

devore nodded and said, this is me, living my life. in bed.

alyse borkan, caspers brand-engagement lead, agreed. pajama time, she said.

kaplan added, if we went straight into wellness, youd get into territories of what you should be doing: i dont work out enough, and i didnt eat the right food. 

partly, were trying to come up with a new sort of category, devore said. this idea of comfort. a little bit of hygge , or however you pronounce it.

 hoo -gah, kaplan said.

one of the ideas for the second issue is this concept my therapist introduced me to, called flneur , devore said. its this idea that you should just wander. he flipped a page. this is by a crime reporter. she became obsessed with weaving and how it helped her with her o.c.d. i envision subsequent stories about crafting. we cant always be working, we cant always be having amazing instagram lives.

she does instagram every single thing she weaves, to be fair, kaplan said.

devore spitballed: i would love to see an exhaustive guide to socks.

how do we feel about soup? are we thinking more casserole? kaplan asked. do we broach marijuana in the next issue?

i think there might be a moment in q1 or q2 to start talking about it, parikh said. bam! disrupted again. 