kathryn schulzs story about an earthquake that will destroy a sizable portion of the coastal northwest was the most-read archive story of 2017.

the year 2017 will be remembered for many things; one of them may be the way that, for so many of us, the news cycle seemed to speed up. even so, readers found their way to the new yorkers archive in droves, discovering classic pieces that have remained or even grown more compelling with the passage of time.

some of this years most-read archive stories reflected, from the past, upon our present: that was the case with mark singers 1997 profile of donald trump as a real-estate showman, and with jane mayers revealing portrait of the ghostwriter behind trumps the art of the deal. others are riveting stories from recent years that are still finding new readers: kathryn schulzs disquieting account of the future earthquake that might hit the pacific northwest; lawrence wrights months-long investigation into the church of scientology; a deeply personal essay by meghan orourke about her experience living with an autoimmune disease; an exploration, by adrian chen, of the conversion of a prized daughter of the westboro baptist church. there are evergreen pieces that address enduring areas of human concern, such as john herseys groundbreaking report, published in 1946, on six survivors of the atomic explosion in hiroshima. and, of course, there is fictionby junot daz, annie proulx, alice munro, and sherman alexie. we hope that you enjoy this dive into the archive. if youd like to discover even more classic pieces, consider subscribing to our daily newsletter: every sunday, we send out a carefully curated selection of archive classics.

1. the really big one, by kathryn shulz

an earthquake will destroy a sizable portion of the coastal northwest. the question is when. read more .

2. "donald trump's ghostwriter tells all," by jane mayer

the art of the deal made america see trump as a charmer with an unfailing knack for business. tony schwartz helped create that mythand regrets it. read more .

3. a loaded gun, by patrick radden keefe

amy bishop was a neurobiologist at the university of alabama in huntsville. how did she become one of the most notorious mass shooters in american history? read more.

4. whats wrong with me?, by meghan orourke

living with the pain of an autoimmune disease. read more .

5. trial by fire, by david grann

cameron todd willingham insisted upon his innocence in the deaths of his children and refused to plead guilty in return for a life sentence. did texas execute an innocent man? read more .

6. the real heroes are dead, by james b. stewart

a 9/11 hero and the loved ones he left behind. read more .

7. obama reckons with a trump presidency, david remnick

inside a stunned white house, president obama considers his legacy and americas future. read more .

8. what is remembered, by alice munro

fiction: a brief affair and its lifelong repercussions. read more .

photograph by popperfoto / getty

9. hiroshima, by john hersey

a groundbreaking report on how six survivors experienced the atomic bomb and its aftermath. read more .

10. trump solo, by mark singer

donald trumps modus operandi has a sharp focus: never budge from the premise that the universe revolves around you, and, above all, stay in character. read more .

11. unfollow, by adrian chen

how a prized daughter of the westboro baptist church came to question its beliefs. read more .

12. the model american, by lauren collins

despite her humble origins, melania trump seems to have internalized donalds outlook. shes as imperial as her husband, if not more so. read more .

13. dead certainty, kathryn schulz

how the netflix documentary making a murderer goes wrong. read more .

14. the cheaters guide to love, by junot daz

fiction: confessions of a self-professed casanova. read more .

15. who are all these trump supporters?, by george saunders

at the candidates rallies, a new understanding of america emerges. read more .

16. letting go, by atul gawande

what should medicine do when it cant save your life? read more .

17. the lost city of z, by david grann

a quest to uncover the secrets of a lost amazon city. read more .

18. the apostate, by lawrence wright

paul haggis versus the church of scientology. read more .

19. brokeback mountain, by annie proulx

fiction: a love story about two cowboys in the wyoming wilderness. read more .

20. the quiet german, by george packer

the astonishing rise of angela merkel, the most powerful woman in the world. read more .

photograph by a24 / everett

21.  moonlight undoes our expectations, by hilton als

by avoiding the overblown clichs so often used to represent black american life in film, barry jenkins has created something achingly alive. read more .

22. blood ties, by nathan heller

two brilliant college lovers were convicted of a brutal slaying. all these years later, why has the case become a cause? read more .

23. how to be good, by larissa macfarquhar

an oxford philosopher thinks he can distill all morality into a formula. is he right? read more .

24. the digital dirt, by nicholas schmidle

how tmz gets the videos and photos that celebrities want to hide. read more .

25. what you pawn i will redeem, by sherman alexie

fiction: the story of a spokane tribe members quest for identity. read more .