having once attended a stage production of singin in the rain at which the people in the front rows were issued with waterproofs during the interval, ahead of the title number, i was ready for whatever  the shape of water  could throw at me. a seat at the back seemed well advised. guillermo del toros new film is his wettest by far, notwithstanding the blood and other secretions that soaked through  crimson peak  (2015). even the opening credits are drenched; we are ushered down what appears to be an undersea hallway, through a door, and into an apartment, where chairs and tables float in a drifting dance. not since alice filled a room with tears has inundation felt like such a wonder.

the heroine of the latest movie is eliza (sally hawkins). she lives alone in baltimore, a lowly figure awaiting change, although, like her namesake in pygmalion and my fair lady, she hasnt a clue whats coming. but eliza doolittle acquired a new voice, whereas this eliza cannot speak at all. she gets by on sign language (clarified by yellow subtitles), a genial courtesy, and a habitual rhythm to her life: a bath, a shoeshine, a bus trip, and a hard nights toil as a cleaner at a scientific facility. her bestindeed her onlyfriends are zelda (octavia spencer), who polishes and scrubs alongside her, and giles (richard jenkins), a toupee-topped bachelor who labors, with scant reward, as a commercial illustrator. his home, liberally strewn with cats, is next to elizas. he likes to serve her key-lime pie, which gives her a lizard-green tongue.

no date is provided, though  the story of ruth  (1960) is playing at the orpheum cinema below elizas apartment, and mister ed, which premired the following year, is on tv. in short, the cold war is at its frosty height, which is why the most sensitive asset ever to be housed in this facility arrives at elizas workplace. not an atomic bomb but something rarer still: a singular being who can breathe both underwater and, less happily, in air. he might be useful in space, the race for which has grown rabid. he has arms and legs and, unlike a merman, no tail. he also has squamous dark skin, like a toad crossed with a snake. (somewhere, under the makeup, is the actor doug jones.) his eyelids bat horizontally, while a proud ruff of what may be gills palpates around his neck. he was found in a south american river, where the locals believed him to be a god. now he is kept in a tank, swimming freely until he bites someones fingers off, after which he is tethered with an iron collar and chains. he is inspected, with fascination, by a scientist named hoffstetler (michael stuhlbarg); chastised with an electric cattle prod by strickland (michael shannon), the head of security; and adored by eliza.

we have met this being (or a close relation of his) before, in his natural habitat. anyone who knows  creature from the black lagoon  (1954) will recall the amazonian beast, armed with a similar crest and claws, who wrought mayhem on an intrusive expedition and, like king kong, bore an american woman to his lair. sadly, it was clear that their relationship was going nowhere beyond a murky grotto, whereas eliza considers her creature to be her dream manor, at least, her dream aquatic biped. she brings him hard-boiled eggs for lunch, which he devours as avidly as cool hand luke, and then teaches him how to sign egg and other words: a dazzling device on del toros part, whereby elizas condition, far from being a handicap, eases the entente between her and the prisoner, while confirming his intelligence. (in stricklands view, he is mindless. that makes it simpler to torture the poor thing.) the creature also has a heart, though heaven knows what purls within its chambers; when eliza bends down and listens to his chest, we hear the soft crash of waves.

for much of the movie, of course, he remains in captivity. scientists, according to strickland, fall in love with their playthingsshades of pygmalion againand we learn that, while the top brass tire of the creature and ask that he be euthanized and cut up, hoffstetler has clandestine motives for keeping him alive. as for the daring eliza, she harbors thoughts of engineering his escape. meanwhile, she must do what she can to school and to bewitch her unlikely beau, and that includes dancing in front of him when she is meant to be mopping the floor, using a broom for a partner. the reference is to fred astaire, who did the same with a hat rack, in  royal wedding  (1951)part of a chorus of echoes that resound throughout. giles has one of those televisions which seem eternally tuned to old movies: time for alice faye, he says, whom we see crooning youll never know, the heartbreaker from  hello frisco, hello  (1943) that won an oscar for best song. other highlights include a fruit-laden carmen miranda, in  that night in rio  (1941), and a scene in which eliza smuggles in a portable record player and treats the creature to a suave burst of glenn miller and i know why, as if to show the beast that, despite appearances, there is something to be said for homo sapiens . a soiled and savage species, we can still make music when we try.