the most famous roy moore in history, through at least the mid-twentieth century, was likely a new yorker named roy e. moore, often referred to as the father of american gymnastics. this moore, who won five national pommel-horse titles while competing with the new york turners, and who later coached four u.s. olympic gymnastics teams, was among the first inducted into the u.s.a. gymnastics hall of fame, two years after his death, in 1959. so dominant was roy e. moore on the pommel horse that a gymnastics maneuver was named after him. (its hard to describe, much less do, but performing a moore involves circling the horse with ones legs a number of times.)

in an amateur athletic union handbook from 1957, a historian and writer who knew roy e. moore described him as first, last and always a gentleman of firm character, vitally interested in the youth and manhood of our country.

strangely, roy stewart moore, the republican candidate for alabamas open senate seatand the possessor of a more complicated reputationwas also a gymnast specializing in the pommel horse, or side horse, as it was known. moore, the politician, attended the united states military academy, and graduated in 1969. his senior yearbook entry reads, a farm boy at heart, roy moore came to west point with patience, dedication, and a yen for hard work. together with a love of god, these characteristics have led roy to a prominent position on the gymnastics team and superintendent of the nursery department of sunday school. in addition to participating in gymnastics, moore was a member of the russian club and the rocket society.

barry robella was in moores class at west point and competed in gymnasticsthe still rings, floor exercises, and parallel bars were robellas specialtyalongside moore. now a professor of systems engineering at the defense acquisition university, in washington, d.c., robella recently recalled moores days, and his own, as a division i military-school gymnast. roy focussed on the side horse, the most difficult apparatus in gymnastics, which requires lots of hours and pain to do well, he said. he didnt have any prior gymnastics experience at all before west point. i think he gravitated to the side horse because he was familiar with horses, back in alabama.

hed never seen a pommel horse, richard jarman, a classmate, who is now an executive-search consultant in kansas city, missouri, confirmed.

was moore good at the sport? ill be candid, robella said. he didnt really have an aptitude for it, which is why he worked so hard, i guess. he wouldnt quit until he got on the team. thats not easy to do in the west point environment, where youre distracted with studying and parades and cadet activities.

asked whether moore could execute a moore on the pommel horse, robella said he couldnt be sure.

i have vivid memories of watching his concentration and level of exertion, jarman said. sometimes roy cleared the sides every time, and sometimes he did not. and at the end of each meet he was just roy again.

neither jarman nor robella believes the recent allegations that their classmate molested teen-age girls little more than a decade after riding the pommel horse at west point. roy was an extremely serious, very devout young man, robella said. with women, he was almost nave. i dont think he had much experience there. maybe he asked some younger girls out. if youre from small-town alabama, you know, thats not unusual. its a place where people got married at fourteen or fifteen back then. in my estimation, his piety might have led him to younger ladies later. he was so earnest, he may have thought younger girls were virginal. that was probably important to him. 