when i met with representative nancy pelosi, the house minority leader, in her office on wednesday afternoon, the revelations about badly behaved men in media were coming so quickly it was hard to keep track. when we sat down in her corner office on the second floor of the capitol, pelosi had not yet heard the news about the longtime public-radio host (and former new yorker contributor) garrison keillors firing after a sexual-harassment accusation. garrison keillor? no-o-o, she said. garrison keillor? really?

it had not been the best few days for pelosi. on sunday, she appeared on meet the press, in the midst of rapidly escalating demands that congress do more to address the sexual harassers in its own ranks. pelosithe most senior female politician in either national partydid not have a good show. repeatedly asked by the host, chuck todd, whether congressman john conyers, jr., a detroit democrat accused of sexual harassment by former staffers, should be forced out as the top democrat on the house judiciary committee, pelosi called conyers an icon of the civil-rights movement, asserted his right to due process, and said that she did not know his accusers. at the same time, pelosi called for zero tolerance of such behavior. conyers would quit his judiciary post under pressure a few hours later, but pelosi refused to publicly demand it, telling todd only that she was sure conyers would do the right thing.

and just like that, the only woman ever to serve as speaker of the house had inserted herself into the unfolding national uproar over male misbehavior. was congress still just the same old boys club that protected its own, even with a woman leading the show? there were outraged tweets, angry online takes, cable-tv denunciations, and new statements from pelosis office walking back her comments, at least partially. on monday, pelosi announced that she had met with and believed one of conyerss accusers, and demanded a swift ethics committee investigation.

when i met with pelosi on wednesday afternoon, conyers was refusing to quit congress altogether, despite the escalating demands. meanwhile, a junior democratic congresswoman and pelosi critic was talking to a scrum of reporters in a classic bit of congressional grandstanding that made clear the political imperatives behind the ire directed at pelosi, with president trump himself an accused serial harasser and the republican senate candidate in alabama facing allegations of making repeated unwanted sexual advances on teen-agers when he was in his thirties. i think that her comments set women back and, quite frankly, our party back decades, congresswoman kathleen rice, of new york, told the reporters. i think that we ceded the moral high ground on sunday when our leader said on meet the press that john conyers was an icon and we dont even know who these women are, when she was fully aware that the woman in question was bound by a nondisclosure agreement. i think we had an opportunity to stake that moral high ground when you have a president who is supporting a man for senate whoall credible allegations that have not been refutedshowed him to be a predator of teen-age girls.

so what did pelosi make of it all?

it took only a minute or so into our interview before it was clear that she was not going to take back her previous comments. pelosi called conyers an icon, and insisted that due process was not something to be so quickly abandoned, even in the middle of a national uproar. she veered between dismay at what she portrayed as a double standard that somehow made her a convenient target when male misdeeds should be the issue, and an insistence that this national awakening would end up being an opportunity that could be seized to make progress for women. look, she said, i see everything as an opportunity.

pelosi noted that she would soon go to the house floor to be on hand for the passing of new rules requiring mandatory anti-sexual-harassment training. she was also working with other members on a new law that would change congresss secretive, cumbersome, and widely criticized system for dealing with sexual-harassment cases, which had allowed conyers to make an undisclosed financial settlement, in 2015, to one of his victims using taxpayer funds.

pelosis shock and dismay about the revelations was evident. she had never, never heard even rumors of such abuses by conyers, she said, and knew nothing of his secret settlement. at the same time, she readily agreed when i asked if she still considered him an icon after the allegations that included demanding sex from a staffer and walking around in front of aides without his clothes on.

i feel sad for mr. conyers, pelosi responded. he has been a valued member for fifty years in the congress of the united states. and yes, she said, i think he has been an icon. hes been a civil-rights leader and the rest of that. even so, she quickly added, no matter how great your legacy, theres no license to abuse people.

pelosi described working behind the scenes over the thanksgiving break to push conyers out of the judiciary ranking membership, noting repeatedly that it took only five days amid a national holiday to get him to leave. i was showing him the door, she said. the timing, however, was terrible: when she gave the meet the press interview, conyers had already agreed to go but was still negotiating over how he would announce that he was stepping aside. i knew he was leaving, pelosi said, but she didnt feel she could disclose it on air.

later in our conversation, she returned to this point. i did my job. thats all i can do, is say who can serve in a capacity on a committee as a ranking. i didnt get any credit for, just before thanksgiving, having him gone by sunday with thanksgiving in between, she told me. is it all right to give him time to tell his family? is it all right to do that? probably not, but we did. it was scheduled to happen, it was scheduled to happen. it was his announcement. i said, why isnt it out there? they said, well, they wanted to change a word for the familys sake, or this or that, whatever, and so it went out a little bit later.

on air, pelosi had said that he will do the right thing. but, she now told me ruefully, they didnt want to hear that.