the canadian soprano barbara hannigan specializes in portraying women in extremis: consider the searing role of agns in george benjamins opera written on skin, which brought her to new yorks mostly mozart festival in 2015, or the title role in alban bergs lulu, in which she has triumphed in brussels and hamburg. (she recently came to new york for an enticing pair of recitals at the park avenue armory.) now you can enjoy her bright and brilliant singing at your convenience, with her new album, crazy girl crazy.

the three-handed title betrays the triumvirate structure: pieces by luciano berio (sequenza iii), berg (the lulu suite, five excerpts from the opera), and gershwin (a suite from the musical girl crazy). through this swath of music marches hannigan, who not only sings and conducts her friends in the excellent ludwig orchestra but has conceived and organized the program around a lulu of her own invention, as if the demimonde antiheroine of bergs expressionist operabased on the lulu character in two plays by frank wedekindhad enjoyed a fuller existence beyond the action of the stage. (at the end of the opera, having been reduced to prostitution, she is murdered by jack the ripper.) the fact that berg and gershwin liked to hang out together in vienna ties the whole thing up in a bow. its an almost loony concept, a hall of mirrors, as hannigan puts it, but she carries it off with awesome confidence.

for hannigan, lulu is the ultimate free spirit, a woman whose presence is overwhelming, inspires strength and daring, and [who] shines, sometimes painfully brightly. berios sequenza iii, a groundbreaking work for unaccompanied voice, from the depths of the nineteen-sixties avant-garde, ushers hannigans lulu into our presence. through hannigans virtuosic dispatch of clicks, shrieks, aspirated consonants, and, when called for, just beautiful singing, we sense lulus basic identity, the relationship between the character and her tool of communication, her voice. with the lulu suite, we see her in full. the music of the first movement, rondo, is so fabulously lyrical that berg did not do much more than cut and re-splice the orchestral accompaniment to large chunks of act ii. but the suite is wickedly difficult, and how hannigan managed to sing and conduct the two movements that include the voice is beyond me.

hannigans recording is more a skilled reading than an interpretation of the lulu suite: it lacks the pitiless precision of a conductor like pierre boulez or the sumptuously organized phrasing of a claudio abbado. but a chamber-ensemble sense of intimacy and excitement largely makes up for that. its in the gershwin suite where things get extreme: hannigan and her sharp-eared co-arranger, bill elliott, have reimagined george and iras song but not for me, for example, with the luridly post-wagnerian harmonies and luxuriously complex orchestrations that abound in bergs lulu. this strange creation is doubly hybrid: musically, in its mashing together of berg and gershwins sound worlds, and in its desperate mood, in which hannigan channels not only the soul of the departed lulu but also that of countess geschwitz, the lesbian who is hopelessly in love with her, and who dies at her feet. its vivid invention is touched with madness, and it wraps up the record, one of the great late-night-and-bourbon albums of the year.