in 2011, when tim pool was twenty-five, he was living with his brother in virginia, playing guitar and making skateboarding videos. he sometimes called himself anti-authoritarian or pro-transparency, but beyond that he didnt think of himself as very political. after seeing a viral video from occupy wall street, he bought a one-way bus ticket to new york. he had no training as a journalist, but he witnessed things that seemed newsworthy, so he took out his cell phone and started recording. one day, as the police tried to evict the protesters by force, he filmed for twenty-one hours straight. in case his phone got confiscated, he broadcast his footage online, in real time. he stuck a piece of masking tape to his phone and wrote on it with a sharpie: live stream. pool is clearly an activist and supporter of occupy wall street as well as a reporter of it, the press critic jay rosen wrote, on his blog. but, rosen continued, we should focus less on whos a journalist and more on valid acts of journalism. times person of the year for 2011 was the protester, and the magazine mentioned pool, among other citizen journalists. he started experimenting with new technologies: drones, gimbals, google glass. as the new york encampment wound down, he imagined a project called the occumentaryhe would drive to occupy protests around the country, live-streaming the whole time. a lot of documentaries are biasedthey leave out a lot of information, pool said in an interview around that time. in the occumentary, he said, you are going to see every second of it. you will get to see everything real and raw. the occumentary never happened. instead, pool became one of the first employees at vice news, covering uprisings in thailand, turkey, egypt, and ferguson, missouri. although he now had access to expensive equipment, his style remained the samebreathless, immediate, live when possible. in ferguson, he and his crew disagreed about how to cover the protests. the camerawoman wanted to stay away from the action and interview jesse jackson, pool told me recently. i went, jesse jackson will say the same thing tomorrow. im gonna go cover whats happening. she kept the cameras, and i went and live-streamed from my phone, walking around the street where grenades were going off. guess which one got more views. last year, pool went solo, and began putting out his timcasts on twitter, periscope, and youtube. he now has a hundred and forty-five thousand youtube subscribersmore than npr, fewer than tmzand he uploads at least one video a day. his funding comes from ads and audience donations. dozens of other youtube demi-celebrities do what pool doeswhat could be called amateur journalism, except that they sometimes make a good living from it. in a video called understanding fake news, pool sits at a picnic table near a motel parking lot. wearing his trademark beanie and speaking in a tone of dispassionate authority, he explains that institutional news shouldnt be trusted, because much of it is propaganda or hyperpartisan content. what would inspire a media company to mislead its audience? money. its really not that complicated. by contrast, he says, the content i produce isnt coming at the behest of a corporation or a government. no one tells me what i can and cant report on, and no one tells me what to say. in part, his pitch is aestheticwho are you going to believe, me or some stodgy guy in a suit? it also elides a simple truth: pool has thrown off the yoke of corporate bureaucracy, but hes still subject to market incentives. his news judgment may differ from cnns; nonetheless, theyre both subject to the whims of the consumer.

the dream of a disruptive alternative to the mass media is perhaps as old as the mass media. in  the boys on the bus , timothy crouses meta-journalistic account of the 1972 presidential campaign, crouse watches a busload of reporters as they watch george mcgovern deliver a tired stump speech. deadlines loom. nothing noteworthy happens. walter cronkite leaves town, complaining of back pain. finally, a poll result comes outthe only hard news of the dayand the reporters rush to file variations on the same story. its june, 1972: burglars are breaking into the watergate hotel, and yet americas newspapers are full of horse-race drudgery. this is not, in crouses telling, the result of organized greed or partisan collusion. rather, he blames conformity, laziness, and the old formulas of classic objective journalism: if the candidate spouted fulsome bullshit all day, the formula made it hard for a reporter to say so directly. crouse encounters a few journalists who aim to cut through the bullshit. one is michael shamberg, the long-haired founder of a cable-tv startup called top value television, who disparages the slick, expensive style of network news. shambergs footage, crouse writes, was blurry, jiggly, and extraordinarily intimate. another is hunter s. thompson, who is portrayed as an amphetamine-addled goon with boundless talent and no tact. after the revolution, a traditional reporter tells crouse, well all write like hunter. whether were living after the revolution or after the fall, this prediction has largely come true. forget cable: anyone whos on medium or tumblr is now free to write like hunter thompson, and anyone with a cell phone can beam jiggly, intimate footage to a potentially unlimited audience. the most arresting video i saw this year appeared on the periscope feed of a far-right social-media pundit named faith goldy, who was in charlottesville, virginia, covering the white-nationalist rally there. after the rally was shut down by police, goldy spotted a group of black lives matter protesters and tagged along, live-streaming as she went. black lives matter is allowed to march, the alt-right is not, goldy said, narrating into her phone. a woman near goldy overheard her. are you with the alt-right? she shouted. get away from here! im just looking to learn about inclusion and diversity, goldy said, raising her eyebrows sarcastically. at one point, goldy said, im a little bit trapped in here. let me get to the periphery. a few seconds later, a dodge challenger ripped through the crowd, sending bodies flying into the air. oh, shit! goldy screamed. oh god, oh god, oh god. she ran away, her phones lens bobbing wildly toward the sky. im gonna find a safe space, she said.