the series new york film and video: no wavetransgressive, running dec. 1-april 1 at moma , reveals a little-known current of cinematic activity in the nineteen-seventies and eighties and brings to light a hidden masterwork, what about me, released in 1993 (screening dec. 27 and jan. 1). it should have been widely acclaimed and launched the career of its director, writer, and star, rachel amodeo. instead, its the only feature that she has made to date.

what about me is a stark, quasi-documentary drama about a young woman facing the dangers and the hard, cruel struggles of east village life. but the movie, even in the depths of its anguish and degradation, never loses the touch of grace and cosmic humor that sets it into motion. it begins as a tragicomic metaphysical fantasy: a country girl in pigtails (amodeo) dies in a freak accident and is reborn as a baby in a comfortably suburban family in chappaqua, new york, which leads to an astonishing dissolve from a crying infant on the carpet to a crying woman in her bedlisa (amodeo), who is orphaned and unemployed and lives with her aunt in a grungy east village apartment.

while the innocently confident lisa wanders from storefront to storefront looking for work, her aunt dies suddenly. upon her return, the buildings super, frank (rockets redglare), rapes her and, soon thereafter, throws her out of the apartment, leaving her to fend for herself on the streets. after the stunned and traumatized lisa is robbed on a stoop by a man who befriends her, she sells the winter coat off her back to pay for a night at a flophouse (the charitable desk clerk is played by the poet gregory corso), and then stays in tompkins square park in the company of nick (richard edson), a bighearted but emotionally damaged and abusive vietnam veteran. fleeing nick, lisa is helped out by tom (nick zedd), a slickly cynical art-punk, and then by paul (richard hell), a compassionate bohemian, all the while enduring a calvary of miseries, including illness and injury, in her descent from bright promise to flailing desperation.

amodeo films east village locations with a tenacious, unflinching curiosity, and she features a range of street people (including another vietnam veteran, played by dee dee ramone) who talk tough, tussle, joke, and tell stories. the black-and-white cinematography, by mark brady and m. henry jones, fuses a rich tangle of physical details with lisas dramatic hand-to mouth struggle, as in her stiff-legged shuffle under street lights during an early snowfall. grime on the windows, piles of garbage on the sidewalks, and scarred walls of dilapidated buildings compose the settings for lisas search for food and shelter, and also for her confrontations with the cold power of the police, with the relentless and inescapable violence of the streets, and, above all, with the deranging, identity-rending ravages of physical and emotional trauma. filling what about me with soul-grinding encounters and galling trials, amodeo nonetheless exalts lisas agonies with tender, transcendent passion. 