a generation has inherited a world without being able to live in it. illustration by adrian tomine audio: listen to this story. to hear more feature stories, download the audm app for your iphone.

imagine, as i often do, that our world were to end tomorrow, and that alien researchers many years in the future were tasked with reconstructing the demise of civilization from the news. if they persevered past the coverage of our president, they would soon identify the curious figure of the millennial as a suspect. a composite image would emerge, of a twitchy and phone-addicted pest who eats away at beloved american institutions the way boll weevils feed on crops. millennials, according to recent headlines, are killing hotels, department stores, chain restaurants, the car industry, the diamond industry, the napkin industry, homeownership, marriage, doorbells, motorcycles, fabric softener, hotel-loyalty programs, casinos, goldman sachs, serendipity, and the mcdonalds mcwrap. the idea that millennials are capriciously wrecking the landscape of american consumption grants quite a bit of power to a group that is still on the younger side. born in the nineteen-eighties and nineties, millennials are now in their twenties and thirties. but the popular image of this generationgiven its name, in 1987, by william strauss and neil howehas long been connected with the notion of disruptive self-interest. over the past decade, that connection has been codified by jean twenge, a psychology professor at san diego state university, who writes about those younger than herself with an air of pragmatic evenhandedness and an undercurrent of moral alarm. (an article adapted from her most recent book, igen, about the cohort after millennials, was published in the september issue of the atlantic with the headline  have smartphones destroyed a generation?  it went viral.) in 2006, twenge published  generation me: why todays young americans are more confident, assertive, entitledand more miserable than ever before . the books cover emblazoned the title across a bare midriff, a flamboyant illustration of millennial self-importance, sandwiched between a navel piercing and a pair of low-rise jeans. according to twenge, millennials are tolerant, confident, open-minded, and ambitious, but also disengaged, narcissistic, distrustful, and anxious. she presents a barrage of statistics in support of this assessment, along with anecdotal testimonials and pop-cultural examples that neatly confirm the trends she identifies. (a revised edition, published in 2014, mentions the hbo show girls six times.) twenge acknowledges that the generation has come of age inside an economic squeeze created by underemployment and rising costs, but she mostly explains millennial traits in terms of culture and choice. parents overemphasized self-esteem and happiness, while kids took their cues from an era of diversity initiatives, decentralized authority, online avatars, and reality tv. as a result, millennials have become irresponsible and fundamentally maladjusted. they believe that every job will be fulfilling and then cant even find a boring one. they must lower their expectations and dim their glittering self-images in order to become functional adults. this argument has a conservative appeal, given its focus on the individual rather than on the structures and the conditions that govern ones life. twenge wonders, is the upswing in minority kids self-esteem an unmitigated good? and then observes, raising childrens self-esteem is not going to solve the problems of poverty and crime. its possible to reach such moralizing conclusions even if one begins with the opposite economic premise. in  the vanishing american adult , published in may, senator ben sasse, republican of nebraska, insists that we live in a time of generalized affluenza, in which much of our stress now flows not from deprivation but, oddly, from surplus. millennials have far too few problems, he argues. sasse chastises parents for allowing their kids to succumb to the character-eroding temptations of contemporary abundance and offers suggestions for turning the school-age generation into the sort of hardworking, financially independent grownups that the millennials have yet to become. the image of millennials has darkened since strauss and howe walked the beat: in their 2000 book,  millennials rising , they claimed that the members of this surging generation were uniquely earnest, industrious, and positive. but the decline in that reputation is hardly surprising. since the nineteen-sixties, most generational analysis has revolved around the groundbreaking idea that young people are selfish. twenges term for millennials merely flips an older one, the me generation, inspired by a 1976 new york cover story by tom wolfe about the baby boomers. (the voluble wolfe, born in 1930, is a member of the silent generation.) wolfe argued that three decades of postwar economic growth had produced a mania for remaking, remodeling, elevating, and polishing ones very self . . . and observing, studying, and doting on it. the fear of growing selfishness has, in the forty years since, only increased. that fear is grounded in concrete changes: the story of american self-interest is a continuous one that nonetheless contains major institutional and economic shifts. adapting to those shifts does tend to produce certain effects. i was born smack in the middle of the standard millennial range, and twenges description of my generations personality strikes me as broadly accurate. lately, millennial dreams tend less toward global fame and more toward affordable health insurance, but she is correct that my cohort has grown up under the influence of novel and powerful incentives to focus on the self. if for the baby boomers self-actualization was a conscious project, and if for gen xborn in the sixties and seventiesit was a mandate to be undermined, then for millennials its more like an atmospheric condition: inescapable, ordinary, and, perhaps, increasingly toxic. a generation has inherited a world without being able to live in it. how did that happen? and why do so many people insist on blaming them for it?

k ids these days: human capital and the making of millennials , by malcolm harris (little, brown), is the first major accounting of the millennial generation written by someone who belongs to it. harris is twenty-eightthe books cover announces his birth year next to a sardonic illustration of elementary-school stickersand he has already rounded the bases of young, literary, leftist media: he is a writer and editor for the online magazine the new inquiry; he has written for jacobin and n+1 . he got his first taste of notoriety during occupy wall street: shortly after activists settled in at zuccotti park, he wrote a blog post for jacobin in which he claimed to have heard unconfirmed reports that radiohead is planning a concert at the occupation this week. he set up an e-mail account using the name of the bands manager and wrote to occupy organizers, conveying the bands interest in performing. later, in a piece for gawker titled  im the jerk who pranked occupy wall street , he explained that his goal was to get more people to the protest, and expressed disdain for the way the organizers responded. (fooled by his e-mail, they held a press conference and confirmed the bands plan to appear.) harriss anatomizing of his peers begins with the star stickers that, along with grade-school participation trophies, so fascinate sasse, twenge, and other writers of generational trend pieces. you suck, you still get a trophy is how twenge puts it, describing contemporary k through five as an endless awards ceremony. harris, on the other hand, regards elementary school as a capitalist boot camp, in which children perform unpaid labor, learn the importance of year-over-year growth through standardized testing, and get accustomed to constant, quantified, increasingly efficient work. the two descriptions are not as far apart as one might think: assuring kids that theyre super specialand telling them, as sasse does, that they have a duty to improve themselves through constant enrichmentis a good way to get them to cleave to a culture of around-the-clock labor. and conditioning them to seek rewards in the form of positive feedbackstars and trophies, hearts and likesis a great way to get them used to performing that labor for free. my memories of childhoodin a suburban neighborhood in west houston that felt newly hatched, as open as farmlandare different, breezy and hot and sunlit. i attended, mostly on scholarship, a southern baptist school attached to one of the largest megachurches in america, and elementary school seemed like the natural price of admission for friends, birthday parties, and long summers full of shrieking, unsupervised play. (the very young arent much for picking up on indoctrination techniques; the religious agitprop felt natural enough, too.) but some kind of training did kick in around the time i entered high school, when i began spending fourteen-hour days on campus with the understanding that i needed to earn a scholarship to a good college. college, of course, is where the millennial lounges around on lush green quads, spends someone elses money, insists on safe spaces, protests her schools heteronormative core curriculum, and wages war on her professors if she receives a grade below an a. i did the first two of those things, thanks to the jefferson scholars foundation at the university of virginia. i also took six classes a semester, worked part time, and crammed my schedule with clubs and committeesin between naps on the quad and beers with friends on my porch couch and long meditative sessions figuring out what kind of a person i was going to be. most undergraduates dont have such a luxurious and debt-free experience. the majority of american college students never live on campus; around a third go to community college. the type of millennial that much of the media flocks towhite, rich, thoughtlessly entitledis largely unrepresentative of what is, in fact, a diverse and often downwardly mobile group. (millennials are the first generation to have just a fifty-fifty chance of being financially better off than their parents.) many millennials grew up poor, went to crummy schools, and have been shuttled toward for-profit colleges and minimum-wage jobs, if not the prison system. (for-profit colleges, which disproportionately serve low-income students, account for roughly a tenth of undergraduates, and more than a third of student-loan defaults.) average student debt has doubled just within this generation, surging from around eighteen thousand dollars at graduation for the class of 2003 to thirty-seven thousand for the class of 2016. (under the tax plan recently passed by house republicans, the situation worsens for student borrowers and their families: that bill eliminates the deduction on student-loan interest and voids the income-tax exemption for tuition benefits.) a young college graduate, having faithfully followed the american path of hard work and achievement, might now find herself in a position akin to a homeowner with negative equity: in possession of an asset that is worth much less than what she owes. in these conditions, the concept of self-interest starts to splinter. for young people, i suspect, the idea of specialness looks like a reward but mostly functions as punishment, bestowing on us the idea that there is no good way of existing other than constantly generating returns. harris and i were born in the same year, and we were in college when the financial crisis hit, in 2008. as i approached graduation, i watched news footage of crumple-faced families carrying boxes out of foreclosed houses, followed by shots of expensively dressed professionals walking to work at their bailed-out banks. i joined the peace corps, and was assigned to kyrgyzstan. shortly after i returned to the u.s., in 2011, the grungy, amorphous occupy movement started blooming; protesters were railing against the impunity of the one per cent in houston, as they were in dozens of other cities across the country. suspended in the amber of my temporary underemployment, i spent long afternoons hanging around hermann square, downtown, making small talk with libertarian lawyers, pan-activists in bandannas and hiking sandals, and a lot of people in my own demographicmillennials coming into their political discontent. that september, occupy set up its makeshift camp in lower manhattan. on the first day of october, some seven hundred demonstrators were arrested and charged with disorderly conduct as they walked on the roadway of the brooklyn bridge, blocking traffic. harris was one of them. he argued, along with many others, that the police had led the group onto the bridge and then arrested them. in 2012, as the case was going forward, his twitter archive was subpoenaed. twitter resisted the order, but eventually provided the tweets, which made it clear that harris had heard the police warning protesters to stay off the roadway. (they tried to stop us, hed tweeted.) he was sentenced to six days of community service. these occupy stories dont make it into kids these daysharris leaves out his personal experience altogether, keen to focus on structural analysis rather than anecdote. he does observe, though, in a discussion of social media, that coke tastes good even once youve seen what it can do to a rusty nail. he continues to make frequent use of twitter.