things were so much simpler when we were kids. we had no idea what a.p.r. financing was, or that wed eventually have to know about it. and making friends was a cinchyou could find comrades of a similar age at school, or just hanging around the neighborhood. making friends as an adult isnt as easy; time to socialize and the desire to leave ones house are both scarce. but, since maintaining inter-human connections is important, and you may someday need people to serve as character witnesses, here are some tips for expanding your social circle:

reach out to your neighbors. revisit your childhood by assuming theres someone within walking distance who is just as bored as you are. go over to borrow a cup of sugar, and, if they dont have meat hooks in their living room, invite them to a game night or bar trivia. your team name can be some kooky pun related to your street address!

join a meet-up group. watch people just like you try to convince each other that this is not weird. no one said playdates were exclusive to toddlers. nopenot weird at all. go ahead and speed-friend-date yourself a new nachos-and-margaritas buddy!

befriend someone near your job. resist the impulse to befriend someone a few cubicles down from you. youll need a person with whom you can safely gossip about your inner work circle. buddy up with someone who works in your building but not at your actual company, who therefore will just have to trust you when you complain about sandys insane thermostat adjustments. they will also have no idea whether or not youre good at your job, except that you never do seem to be there . . .

have an epic quest with someone. psychology tells us that the stress of a traumatic event bonds people, which makes total sense. remember how, at the end of the goonies, they were even better chums than before? get into a goonies-type adventure with some people, if you can swing it. when you hear of someone planning on tinkering with something she bought at a mysterious shop in a back alley, nab an invite. if you both survive, youll be tight as all get-out.

visit your local library. its a fact: people who read are just more interesting. find friendship with someone else who appreciates analog books that you dont have to pay for (also, develop your own appreciation of them if you havent yet). scan for someone checking out books on a subject youre into, and see if hed like to form a book club. also, while youre at it, gauge his interest in forming a band, improv troupe, or benevolent dance gang.

join a sports league. friendships formed as members of a team working together toward a common goal are strong and fulfilling. unless you lose a lot, in which case, foster friendships by licking your wounds together at a local watering hole after the game.

dont listen to sally albright. it is impossible to dislike when harry met sally, but one of its central messages is wrong. platonic male-female friendships are not only possibletheyre healthy! however, if youre concerned that your friend is starting to hold a torch for you, immediately piss yourself in front of him at your next buddy-hang. lets see him harbor romantic feelings after that! be sure to maintain eye contact; it establishes dominance.

if all else fails, just try to befriend some people at your gym. try to get one of them to invite you to his wedding.