the root of violence

i study decision-making in violent contexts, and i was struck by paul blooms assertion that perpetrators of violence dont dehumanize their victims but, rather, see them as humans and intentionally choose to harm them as such (books, november 27th). bloom seems to assume that ones reasons for acting violently are consistent over time, and that the physical and mental responses to harming someone are the same for ones fiftieth violent act as for ones first. in my research on the holocaust and on the rwandan genocide, i have found that the first time a human kills another human the experience is horrific: perpetrators describe reactions that include vomiting, shaking, recurrent nightmares, and profound traumamuch like the trauma of military veterans, who, arguably, are better trained than civilian perpetrators of genocide to deal with the consequences of killing. but, over time, the physical and emotional horror at participating in violence subsides. this, then, is when the moralizing rationale that draws on dehumanizing propaganda comes into play. how does one adapt to participation in violence? by calling on culturally available repertoires that frame violence as the morally right thing to do.

aliza luft

assistant professor of sociology, u.c.l.a.

los angeles, calif.

verse and form

in her review of mary olivers devotions, ruth franklin asserts that oliver writes blank verse in a conversational style (books, november 27th). as a longtime reader and sometime critic of olivers work, i was surprised by this observation. blank verse consists of unrhymed pentameter lines in a pattern of five accented syllables per line. olivers dominant form, however, is free verse, and her most conspicuous formal devices are repetition, parallelism, and especially anaphora (meanwhile the world goes on. / meanwhile the sun and the clear pebbles of the rain . . .). franklin accurately portrays oliver as a spiritual poet unconstrained by organized religion. had oliver chosen the more conservative form of blank verse, her poems might have evoked, in form as well as in content, wordsworths prelude. instead, they partake of the unchurched freedom of whitman and the expansive openness of roethkes late meditations.

ben howard

professor emeritus of english

alfred university

alfred, n.y.

why christie matters

anthony lane uses his review of the remake of murder on the orient express largely to take down agatha christie, the best-selling novelist of all time, while missing her historical and present cultural relevance (the current cinema, november 20th). i dont think you would easily find anyone who defends christie as a master of literary prose, but thats not why people read her novels, nor does that mean her work is without value or merit. not only is the story a fun, engaging mystery, but, when christie wrote it, in the nineteen-thirties, it was a twist on typical revenge plots. in christies story, an abusive man is brought to justice by the unexpected victims of the fallout of his crime against a young girl. that the novel was written by a woman about the abuse of a female makes it even more worthy of consideration during this deluge of news about sexual harassment and victim empowerment. instead, lane suggests that we read a male author of mysteries, georges simenon, who he says displays an intimate acquaintance with mortal weakness for which she could only grope. it was christie, though, who was writing about a topic increasingly relevant to our own time.

lenae day

los angeles, calif.