a culture-shifting investigation of the movie mogul harvey weinstein was among the new yorkers top posts of 2017.

the balance, though, is composed of exclusive reporting: ronan farrows culture-shifting investigation of the movie mogul harvey weinstein; ryan lizzas staggering phone conversation with the short-lived white house communications director anthony scaramucci; deeply reported profiles by jane mayer of vice-president mike pence and robert mercer, the hedge-fund tycoon behind the trump presidency; rachel avivs investigation of guardians preying on the elderly; evan osnoss exploration of the risk of nuclear war with north korea, based on a reporting trip to pyongyang; patrick radden keefes investigations of the financier carl icahn and of the sackler familys involvement in the opioid crisis; charles betheas reporting on rumors that the senate candidate roy moore was banned from an alabama shopping center because of troubling interactions with teen-age girls; and much more. im biased, but to me its the kind of journalism worth coming back to repeatedly. if youre not a loyal new yorker reader now, we hope you become one in the new year. (to stay on top of what we do every day, try downloading our today app and signing up for our daily newsletter .) heres a look back at our most engaging pieces of 2017.

determining the new yorker s most popular pieces of the year is a surprisingly fraught process. should the measurement be page views, visitors, or some other criteria? from a financial standpoint, the new yorker is increasingly dependent upon its loyal readers, people who come back again and again to our stories and, eventually, subscribe. as a result, when it came to selecting the most-read new yorker stories of 2017, we decided to base our list on the total number of minutes that readers spent on an article. we felt that was the best measure of what were interested ingetting readers to engage deeply with what we do. the resulting list is a diverse collection. it includes a books piece by elizabeth kolbert, about the human mind and the limits of reason; a pitch-perfect daily shouts by colin nissan, about a call between a 911 operator and someone who works from home; and an essay by the actress molly ringwald on her experiences of sexual harassment in hollywood.

1. from aggressive overtures to sexual assault: harvey weinsteins accusers tell their stories, by ronan farrow

multiple women share harrowing accounts of sexual assault and harassment by the film executive. read more .

photograph by phillip faraone / getty

2. anthony scaramucci called me to unload about white house leakers, reince priebus, and steve bannon, by ryan lizza

he started by threatening to fire the entire white house communications staff. it escalated from there. read more .

3. harvey weinsteins army of spies, by ronan farrow

the film executive hired private investigators, including ex-mossad agents, to track actresses and journalists. read more .

4. how trump could get fired, by evan osnos

the constitution offers two main paths for removing a president from office. how feasible are they? read more .

5. the danger of president pence, by jane mayer

trumps critics yearn for his exit. but mike pence, the corporate rights inside man, poses his own risks. read more .

6. doomsday prep for the super-rich, by evan osnos

some of the wealthiest people in americain silicon valley, new york, and beyondare getting ready for the crackup of civilization. read more .

7. why facts dont change our minds, by elizabeth kolbert

new discoveries about the human mind show the limitations of reason. read more .

illustration by cristiana couceiro

8. trump, putin, and the new cold war, by evan osnos, david remnick, and joshua yaffa

what lay behind russias interference in the 2016 electionand what lies ahead? read more .

9. americas future is texas, by lawrence wright

with right-wing zealots taking over the legislature even as the states demographics shift leftward, texas has become the nations bellwether. read more .

10. the risk of nuclear war with north korea, by evan osnos

on the ground in pyongyang: could kim jong un and donald trump goad each other into a devastating confrontation? read more .

11. donald trumps worst deal, by adam davidson

the president helped build a hotel in azerbaijan that appears to be a corrupt operation engineered by oligarchs tied to irans revolutionary guard. read more .

12. i work from home, by colin nissan

then i got sucked into watching a youtube video about meerkats. read more .

13. how the elderly lose their rights, by rachel aviv

guardians can sell the assets and control the lives of senior citizens without their consentand reap a profit from it. read more .

14. the reclusive hedge-fund tycoon behind the trump presidency, by jane mayer

how robert mercer exploited americas populist insurgency. read more .

photograph by eugene richards for the new yorker

15. the addicts next door, by margaret talbot

west virginia has the highest overdose death rate in the country. locals are fighting to save their neighborsand their townsfrom destruction. read more.

16. the family that built an empire of pain, by patrick radden keefe

the sackler dynastys ruthless marketing of painkillers has generated billions of dollarsand millions of addicts. read more .

17. rex tillerson at the breaking point, by dexter filkins

will donald trump let the secretary of state do his job? read more .

18. #vanlife, the bohemian social-media movement, by rachel monroe

what began as an attempt at a simpler life quickly became a life-style brand. read more .

19. harvey weinsteins secret settlements, by ronan farrow

the mogul used money from his brother and elaborate legal agreements to hide allegations of predation for decades. read more .

20. carl icahns failed raid on washington, by patrick radden keefe

was president trumps richest adviser focussed on helping the countryor his own bottom line? read more .

21. locals were troubled by roy moores interactions with teen girls at the gadsden mall, by charles bethea

rumors have swirled for years that, in the early eighties, the alabama senate candidate was banned from a shopping mall for bothering teen-age girls. read more .

22. all the other harvey weinsteins, by molly ringwald

i have had plenty of harvey weinsteins of my own over the years, enough to feel a sickening shock of recognition. read more .

23. weighing the costs of speaking out about harvey weinstein, by ronan farrow

annabella sciorra, daryl hannah, and other women explain their struggles with going public. read more .

24. michael flynn, general chaos, by nicholas schmidle

what the removal of flynn as the national-security adviser reveals about donald trumps white house. read more .

photograph by william mebane for the new yorker

25. anthony bourdains moveable feast, by patrick radden keefe

guided by a lusty appetite for indigenous culture and cuisine, the swaggering chef has become a travelling statesman. read more .