the last girl , by nadia murad (tim duggan) . growing up in an iraqi village as a member of the yazidi minority, murad led a happy life, revolving around her wise and funny mother, her extended family, and school (even if the history curriculum effaced her community entirely). but, in 2014, when she was twenty-one, isis militants attacked the village and made her a sex slave, along with thousands of other yazidi women and girls. through courage, luck, and the help of a sunni family who risked their lives for her, she eventually escaped. this devastating memoir unflinchingly recounts her experiences and questions the complicity of witnesses who acquiesced in the suffering of others.

the collector of lives , by ingrid rowland and noah charney (norton) . giorgio vasari, a prolific artist of sixteenth-century italy, is best remembered for his lives of the artists, a celebration of the great figures of the renaissance. this engaging biography frames him as the first writer to capture the transformation of artists from mere craftsmen to thinkers. noting that, before that era, it was unusual for art to be commissioned solely on the strength of an artists name, the authors credit vasari with the invention of artthe creation of a world in which ascribing a painting to leonardo, for example, may transform our perception of its worth. their account of vasaris tuscany, and of the facts (and fictions) that went into his lives, is a fitting tribute to their subjects biographical achievements.

forest dark , by nicole krauss (harper) . this mystical novel tracks the parallel journeys of two new yorkers: jules epstein, unmoored, in his late sixties, by the deaths of his parents; and the narrator, a novelist who has lost faith in her craft and her marriage. separately, they set off for tel aviv, where epstein was born and the narrator was conceived. the narrator is recruited to work on a murky project involving kafka, who, her contact alleges, did not actually die in 1924. epstein, meanwhile, encounters a rabbi who believes him to be a descendant of king david. delving into the metaphysical and the spiritual realms, krauss presents a stirring, sprawling exploration of the unformed and nameless life that exists alongside the one were consciously living.

the time of mute swans , by ece temelkuran, translated from the turkish by kenneth dakan (arcade) . set in ankara in the tense summer leading up to the turkish coup of 1980, this novel centers on two children, ali and aye, who contend with the strife of the adult world. their families, though divided by class, share leftist sympathies, and are consequently vulnerable. intimate conflicts arise from public ones: a relationship with obtuse but seemingly harmless neighbors deteriorates, with grave consequences. the author, a well-known journalist critical of the current turkish government, moves skillfully between history and fiction. the innocence of the children can be cloyingthey plot to release butterflies inside the parliament buildingbut the end of that innocence is vividly evoked.