hollywood has two main ways of depicting working-class characters: as sullen, silent strugglers, or as loud, laughable vulgarians. craig gillespies i, tonya, which opens tomorrow, takes mainly the second path, and that approach, that failure to find an original and personal tone, undercuts and counteracts the movies main meritits empathetic depiction of tonya harding, the olympic figure skater who, in 1994, was involved in a plot to harm her main rival, nancy kerrigan.

the filmmakers are upfrontin title cardsabout basing the film on interviews with the real-life harding and her ex-husband jeff gillooly, and about the differing points of view on the events that the drama will present. the film begins, ends, and is punctuated by faux interviews with the main characters, who discuss their conflicting accounts of what happened or might have happened and their divergent points of view about those events. gillespie in effect films the entire action as hypotheticals, in a cinematic conditional mood thats emphasized throughout the film both by the interpolated staged interviews and by characters asides to the camera, addressing the viewer with winking interpretations of the actions in progress.

the drama starts in tonyas childhood, in portland, oregon, in the mid-nineteen-seventies. shes being raised by her single mother, lavona (allison janney), a fast-talking, smart, lifeworn, and embittered waitress, who brings tonya, who is not quite four years old and has already displayed talent and passion for skating, to the local rink for rigorous training, in the hope that she might eventually make the ice capades. but lavonas idea of tough love appears to be tougher than it is loving. in gillespies telling, tonya (played as an adult by margot robbie, who also co-produced the film) was abused by lavona both as a child and as an adult. but the film shows lavona beating tonya with a hairbrush (only once, lavona chimes in), slapping and pummelling her, verbally berating her (lavona claims that tonya skates better angry), preventing the child from leaving the ice to pee. then, during a fight with the teen-age tonya, lavona is depicted as throwing first a glass at her and then a knife, which pierces her arm.

meanwhile, tonya wins prizes in figure-skating competitions and rises through the ranks of the field. the unpampered, rugged, rustic tonya also chops wood, fixes cars, and holds tough manual-labor jobs. her athletic ascension is presented (to the extent that its presented at all) as a sort of tunnel-vision monomania, the work of a furious virtuosa whose physical strength, athleticism, and skill have no balance in education or experience. (she quit high school in order to devote herself to skating.) she competes under her mothers iron grip and before her iron gaze, and endures her mothers fiercely partisan, loud, raucous, and uninhibitedly crude advocacy on her behalf from the stands. lavona is depicted as becoming both a terror and an embarrassment, and tonya, while still a teen-ager, makes her break, leavingas the movie tells itthe frying pan for the fire.

at fifteen, at her local rink, she meets jeff gillooly (sebastian stan), who was about eighteen and was there with his best friend, shawn eckardt (paul walter hauser). she begins to date jeff, and jeff, too, is depicted in the film as physically abusive: he beats her, repeatedly; he mashes her head against a wall; she takes out a restraining order against him. at the age of eighteen, she marries jeff, then leaves him, then reconciles with him; he slams a car door on her hand (in the film, jeff denies doing this); he threatens her, and then himself, with a gunand then shoots her, resulting in a flesh wound to her face.

gillespies flashy camera moves on and off the ice, his slick and rapid editing tricks, and his intercutting of interviews and asides dont provide perspective but rather amusement, even diversion, distracting from whats actually a crucial and anguished subject of the movie, the abuse that tonya endures. but gillespie plays it for comedy; what he approaches with some measure of earnestness is the aftermathtonyas effort to conceal a facial bruise before a competition, her complicity with jeff in helping him avoid arrest for shooting her.

while becoming a skating star, the first american woman (the movie dwells on this point) to complete a triple axel, tonya endures yet another form of abuse, not physical but systemic: the american ice-skating establishment, in the person of the judges it employs to score competitions, discriminates against tonya on the basis of her background and her manners, to reinforce the sports genteel and, as one judge says, wholesome self-image.

yet the movie perpetuates the very condescension that it purports to condemn: it treats tonyas background, her tastes, her habits, her way of talking, as a joke. it may think its laughing with her, but tonyas not laughing. for that matter, tonyas not doing much of anything except skating. halfway through the film, after she delivers unsatisfying results at the 1992 winter olympics, in albertville, france (tonya blames a broken skate, but the movie, in a rapid, almost flash-frame montage, suggests that she has been partying too hard, eating and drinking too much, gaining weight, and getting out of shape), and is preparing for a comeback (at twenty-three) in the 1994 olympics, in lillehammer, norway, the infamous story gets under way, the one that has made the real-life harding notorious.

i, tonya goes into intricate detail regarding the attack on hardings principal rival, nancy kerrigan, who was struck on the knee with a metal rod just before matching up against harding in a competition in detroit prior to the olympics. the movie shows the nature of tonyas involvementand noninvolvement. i wont spoil the twist, but here, too, she is revealed to be the victim of self-serving people close to her. the walls of law enforcement close in on tonya, and her bewilderment at the devastating and irreparable consequences of her bad associations offers a touch of pathos that most of the movie, depicting horrors, deflects.

yet the movie shies away from tonyas actual identity, temperament, culture, activities, and tastes. her work as a fork-lift operator and a welder is a tossed-off line of dialogue; her interests are undefined; her ostensible lack of refinement is merely a matter of her loud voice and salty vocabulary; her relationships are utterly vague, as is her wider network of interactions, of friends and relatives and colleagues and rivals. gillespie never sees tonya as a person but as a character in a drama, reduced to her function in her own story. the movie delivers more of the culture and mental life of the secondary character of shawn, the delusional braggart who serves as tonyas bodyguard and claims to be an internationally acclaimed counterterrorism expert. gillespie stages his empathy for tonya at arms length; he fails to respond to her experience in a direct, personal way. the result is a film thats as derisive and dismissive toward tonya harding as it shows the world at large to have been.