david benatar may be the worlds most pessimistic philosopher. an anti-natalist, he believes that life is so bad, so painful, that human beings should stop having children for reasons of compassion. while good people go to great lengths to spare their children from suffering, few of them seem to notice that the one (and only) guaranteed way to prevent all the suffering of their children is not to bring those children into existence in the first place, he writes, in a 2006 book called  better never to have been: the harm of coming into existence . in benatars view, reproducing is intrinsically cruel and irresponsiblenot just because a horrible fate can befall anyone, but because life itself is permeated by badness. in part for this reason, he thinks that the world would be a better place if sentient life disappeared altogether. for a work of academic philosophy, better never to have been has found an unusually wide audience. it has 3.9 stars on goodreads, where one reviewer calls it required reading for folks who believe that procreation is justified. a few years ago, nic pizzolatto, the screenwriter behind true detective, read the book and made rust cohle, matthew mcconaugheys character, a nihilistic anti-natalist. (i think human consciousness is a tragic misstep in evolution, cohle says.) when pizzolatto mentioned the book to the press, benatar, who sees his own views as more thoughtful and humane than cohles, emerged from an otherwise reclusive life to clarify them in interviews. now he has published  the human predicament: a candid guide to lifes biggest questions , a refinement, expansion, and contextualization of his anti-natalist thinking. the book begins with an epigraph from t. s. eliots  four quartets humankind cannot bear very much realityand promises to provide grim answers to questions such as do our lives have meaning?, and would it be better if we could live forever? benatar was born in south africa in 1966. he is the head of the philosophy department at the university of cape town, where he also directs the universitys bioethics centre, which was founded by his father, solomon benatar, a global-health expert. (benatar dedicated better never to have been to my parents, even though they brought me into existence.) beyond these bare facts, little information about him is available online. there are no pictures of benatar on the internet; youtube videos of his lectures consist only of powerpoint slides. one video, titled  what does david benatar look like? , zooms in on a grainy photograph taken from the back of a lecture hall until an arrow labelled david benatar appears, indicating the abstract, pixellated head of a man in a baseball cap. after finishing the human predicament, i wrote to benatar to ask if we could meet. he readily agreed, then, after reading a few of my other pieces, followed up with a note. i see that you aim to portray the person you interview, in addition to his or her work, he wrote: one pertinent fact about me is that i am a very private person who would be mortified to be written about in the kind of detail ive seen in the other interviews. i would thus decline to answer questions i would find too personal. (i would be similarly uncomfortable with a photograph of me being used.) i understand entirely if you would rather not proceed with the interview under these circumstances. if, however, you would be happy to conduct an interview that recognized this aspect of me, i would be delighted. undoubtedly, benatar is a private person by nature. but his anonymity also serves a purpose: it prevents readers from psychologizing him and attributing his views to depression, trauma, or some other aspect of his personality. he wants his arguments to be confronted in themselves. sometimes people ask, do you have children?  he told me later. (he speaks calmly and evenly, in a south african accent.) and i say, i dont see why thats relevant. if i do, im a hypocritebut my arguments could still be right.  when he told me that hes had anti-natalist views since he was very young, i asked how young. a child, he said, after a pause. he smiled uncomfortably. this was exactly the kind of personal question he preferred not to answer.

benatar and i met at the world trade center, where the new yorker has its offices. he is small and trim, with an elfin face, and he was neatly dressed in trousers and a lavender sweater; i recognized him by his baseball cap. on the buildings sixty-fourth floor, we settled into a pair of plush chairs arranged near windows with panoramic views of manhattan: the hudson on the left, the east river on the right, the skyscrapers of midtown in the distance. social scientists often ask people about their levels of happiness. a typical survey asks respondents to rate their lives on a scale of one (the worst possible life for you) to ten (the best possible life for you); according to the 2017 world happiness report , americans surveyed between 2014 and 2016 rated their lives, on average, 6.99less happy than the lives of canadians (7.32) and happier than those of citizens of sudan (4.14). another survey reads, taking all things together, would you say you are (i) very happy, (ii) rather happy, (iii) not very happy or (iv) not at all happy? in recent years, in countries such as india, russia, and zimbabwe, responses to this question have been trending upward . in 1998, ninety-three per cent of americans claimed to be very or rather happy. by 2014, after the great recession, the number had fallen , but only slightly, to ninety-one per cent. people, in short, say that life is good. benatar believes that they are mistaken. the quality of human life is, contrary to what many people think, actually quite appalling, he writes, in the human predicament. he provides an escalating list of woes, designed to prove that even the lives of happy people are worse than they think. were almost always hungry or thirsty, he writes; when were not, we must go to the bathroom. we often experience thermal discomfortwe are too hot or too coldor are tired and unable to nap. we suffer from itches, allergies, and colds, menstrual pains or hot flashes. life is a procession of frustrations and irritationswaiting in traffic, standing in line, filling out forms. forced to work, we often find our jobs exhausting; even those who enjoy their work may have professional aspirations that remain unfulfilled. many lonely people remain single, while those who marry fight and divorce. people want to be, look, and feel younger, and yet they age relentlessly: they have high hopes for their children and these are often thwarted when, for example, the children prove to be a disappointment in some way or other. when those close to us suffer, we suffer at the sight of it. when they die, we are bereft. the knee-jerk response to observations like these is, if life is so bad, why dont you just kill yourself? benatar devotes a forty-three-page chapter to proving that death only exacerbates our problems. life is bad, but so is death, he concludes. of course, life is not bad in every way. neither is death bad in every way. however, both life and death are, in crucial respects, awful. together, they constitute an existential visethe wretched grip that enforces our predicament. its better, he argues, not to enter into the predicament in the first place. people sometimes ask themselves whether life is worth living. benatar thinks that its better to ask sub-questions: is life worth continuing? (yes, because death is bad.) is life worth starting? (no.) benatar is far from the only anti-natalist. books such as sarah perrys  every cradle is a grave  and thomas ligottis  the conspiracy against the human race  have also found audiences. there are many misanthropic anti-natalists: the voluntary human extinction movement, for example, has thousands of members who believe that, for environmental reasons, human beings should cease to exist. for misanthropic anti-natalists, the problem isnt lifeits us. benatar, by contrast, is a compassionate anti-natalist. his thinking parallels that of the philosopher thomas metzinger, who studies consciousness and artificial intelligence; metzinger espouses digital anti-natalism, arguing that it would be wrong to create artificially conscious computer programs because doing so would increase the amount of suffering in the world. the same argument could apply to human beings.

like a boxer who has practiced his counters, benatar has anticipated a range of objections. many people suggest that the best experiences in lifelove, beauty, discovery, and so onmake up for the bad ones. to this, benatar replies that pain is worse than pleasure is good. pain lasts longer: theres such a thing as chronic pain, but theres no such thing as chronic pleasure, he said. its also more powerful: would you trade five minutes of the worst pain imaginable for five minutes of the greatest pleasure? moreover, theres an abstract sense in which missing out on good experiences isnt as bad as having bad ones. for an existing person, the presence of bad things is bad and the presence of good things is good, benatar explained. but compare that with a scenario in which that person never existedthen, the absence of the bad would be good, but the absence of the good wouldnt be bad, because thered be nobody to be deprived of those good things. this asymmetry completely stacks the deck against existence, he continued, because it suggests that all the unpleasantness and all the misery and all the suffering could be over, without any real cost. some people argue that talk of pain and pleasure misses the point: even if life isnt good, its meaningful. benatar replies that, in fact, human life is cosmically meaningless: we exist in an indifferent universe, perhaps even a multiverse, and are subject to blind and purposeless natural forces. in the absence of cosmic meaning, only terrestrial meaning remainsand, he writes, theres something circular about arguing that the purpose of humanitys existence is that individual humans should help one another. benatar also rejects the argument that struggle and suffering, in themselves, can lend meaning to existence. i dont believe that suffering gives meaning, benatar said. i think that people try to find meaning in suffering because the suffering is otherwise so gratuitous and unbearable. its true, he said, that nelson mandela generated meaning through the way he responded to sufferingbut thats not to defend the conditions in which he lived. i asked benatar why the proper response to his arguments wasnt to strive to make the world a better place. the possible creation of a better world in the future, he told me, hardly justifies the suffering of people in the present; at any rate, a dramatically improved world is impossible. itll never happen. the lessons never seem to get learnt. they never seem to get learnt. maybe the odd individual will learn them, but you still see this madness around you, he said. you can say, for goodness sake! cant you see how youre making the same mistakes humans have made before? cant we do this differently? but it doesnt happen. ultimately, he said, unpleasantness and suffering are too deeply written into the structure of sentient life to be eliminated. his voice grew more urgent; his eyes teared up. were asked to accept what is unacceptable. its unacceptable that people, and other beings, have to go through what they go through, and theres almost nothing that they can do about it. in an ordinary conversation, i wouldve murmured something reassuring. in this case, i didnt know what to say.