the new film by steven spielberg, the post, begins in the jungle, shifts to washington, and defies us to tell the difference. courtrooms, boardrooms, nicely decorated drawing rooms, and newsrooms furnished with little more than telephones and smoke: they all feel cocked and combat-ready, and every deadline looms like an ambush. with spielberg in command, almost nothing is allowed to soothe the tension. if a great white shark swam by, it would be told to move on.

whos the longhair? so one soldier says to another, as they prepare to head into a dark vietnamese forest, in 1966. the guy with the frizz is daniel ellsberg (matthew rhys), who is employed by the rand corporation and embedded with u.s. troops. on the plane back to america, he is summoned by the secretary of defense, robert mcnamara (bruce greenwood), and asked, straight out, for his opinion on the war: are things better or worse? much the same, ellsberg replies, and an exasperated mcnamara agrees. but that is not what he tells the press, who have assembled on the tarmac to hear his views. in every respect, were making progress, he says. greenwood has perfected the mcnamara smilelong and curved, like a scythe.

the movie, written by liz hannah and josh singer, sprouts from this rift between the true state of affairs and the alternative facts that are presented to the public. as is common knowledge, it was ellsbergs conscience about the rift that led him to stealor, if you prefer, to liberatea hulking stash of incriminating documents, which came to be called the pentagon papers. in case the knowledge isnt that common, however, especially among younger viewers, the words top secretsensitive are visible on the files that ellsberg plucks from a drawer one night. we also get a potted history of american involvement in southeast asia, from truman to johnson. spielberg remains a sworn foe of narrative confusion, and, as for potting, nobody does it better.

among the audience for the post will be a faction that chafes at the title and believes, not without cause, that it should be the times. one problem with any heist is what to do with the loot, and it was to neil sheehanthen a correspondent for the times , and later the author of a bright shining lie (1988), one of the indispensable books on vietnamthat ellsberg wisely went. his move was understandable, given the reach and the resources of the paper, but, in spielbergs film, it annoys the hell out of ben bradlee (tom hanks), the editor of the washington post , who, sniffing a scoop, fishes forty bucks from his wallet and tells an intern to catch a train to new york, with instructions to snoop around and work out where the smell is coming from. sure enough, the times breaks the news, casting grave aspersions upon governments old and new, while the post is left to lead with a triumphant splash on the wedding of tricia nixon.

hanks does a lot with bradleemore than youd expect, given the twin obstacles that he has to surmount. the first is bradlee himself, the unassailable star of his own life, which bore the shape and the shine of a golden-age motion picture; how do you match that? the second is jason robards, who won an oscar for his portrayal of bradlee in all the presidents men (1976), and showed a generation of men how to park their feet on a table. there was a time when only cowboys could do that, with a clink of spurs; now it was a beltway brahmin in a striped shirt. robards also patented a kind of growling drawla grawl, so to speakthat hanks is too smart to mimic. his bradlee comes with a snap and a hint of a snarl, ditching the languor for the sake of impatience, and his trademark pose is a doughty crossing of the arms. one writer, who has requested two whole days to get a piece together, is briskly reminded that he is a reporter and not a novelist. somebody else describes bradlee as a pirate. hence the gleefuland, to be honest, very hanksianmoment when, under siege from every angle, he ducks sideways and says to his assistant, my god, the fun .

the glee is not entirely shared by his boss, katharine graham (meryl streep), who, since her husbands suicide, has been the sole proprietor of the post , and whose default condition, for a while, appears to be one notch up from a tizzy. we first see her waking up, with a start, in a bed strewn with papers and books; entering a restaurant, she knocks over a chair; now and then, she has to take puffy little breaths, like a reluctant swimmer nerving herself at the pools edge. not that you can blame her, for the water is infested with men. as a woman, even a wealthy one, she is all but alone in a hostile or, at best, a condescending world. the story is set just as her newspaper is about to go public on the stock market, in a bid to raise capital, and theres a wonderful shot of a door swinging wide to admit her to the meeting at which the share price will be agreed. there, before her, is a thick male swarm, uniformly clad in dark suits. politely, they part to make way for her, and yet, at some level, she is no more welcome here than she would be in the innermost chambers of the vatican.