the reason for the disorienting vagueness of so much of ice becomes clear only in retrospect. it is a work of traumatized sexual surrealism, and its true setting is its authors haunted imagination.

the narrator must also contend with a rival, a powerful warlord, known as the warden, who is the head of an insurgency that is somehow involved in the global chaos. (the politics of the apocalypse are vague.) the girl is claimed first by one of these men and then the other. as the novel progresses, there are intimations that the warden and the narrator are no more than two halves of the same myopic, macho whole: between the two of us she was reduced to nothing; her only function might have been to link us together. what both men seem to want most of all is the right to claim dominance over her. there are several difficult scenes of sexual assault. will-less, she submitted to him, even to the extent of making small, compliant movements fitting her body to his, one of these scenes concludes. she was dazed, she hardly knew what was happening, her normal state of consciousness interrupted, lost, the nature of her surrender not understood.

the plot, such as it is, follows the narrators obsessive pursuit of a young woman. (shes twenty-one at the novels outset, but he refers to her as the girl throughout.) her character is never fully developed: she remains a mostly empty vessel for the narrators desirea glass girl of albino paleness with glittering hair. meanwhile, walls of ice are closing in on the habitable world, creating mayhem. the situation was alarming, the atmosphere tense, the emergency imminent.

the story of  ice  is reported by a nameless narrator who claims to be a former soldier and explorer. we soon realize that he is entirely unreliable, and perhaps mentally unstable. reality had always been something of an unknown quantity to me, he confesses early on. he takes medication for headaches and insomnia; it produces horrible dreams that are not confined to sleep only. the book has a febrile, hallucinatory disregard for conventional storytelling, and a habit of blurring the lines between the literal and the metaphorical. not one character is named; with a single exception, none of the settings are identified beyond the barest details.

anna kavans novel ice, a fantasia about predatory male sexual behavior that takes place during an apocalyptic climate catastrophe, was first published fifty years ago. (an anniversary edition has just been released by penguin classics.) it was the last novel that kavan published before she died in 1968there have since been a number of posthumous publicationsand it was the culmination of an artistic trajectory that took her from conventional realism into something strange and difficult to categorize. that evolution was fuelled by a peripatetic life that included two unhappy marriages, severe depression, and a decades-long addiction to heroin. reading ice is a disorienting and at times emotionally draining experience, not least because, these days, one might become convinced that kavan had seen the future.

anna kavan was born helen emily woods in 1901 in cannes, france, to well-to-do expatriate english parents. her father, claude, had inherited wealth from a family estate in northumberland; her much younger mother, also named helen, married young, and was only eighteen when she gave birth to her daughter. kavan was shipped off to boarding schools from the age of six. her father committed suicide when she was ten. her relations with her mother remained strained for the rest of her life.

at nineteen, with her mothers encouragementor coercion, according to some accountskavan married donald ferguson, who was a dozen years her senior. kavans biographer david callard suggests that ferguson may have been one of her mothers cast-off lovers. the newlyweds moved to burma, where ferguson was employed by the colonial administration as a railroad engineer. they had a son in 1922, and were legally divorced in 1928, though the marriage had effectively ended much earlier. kavans second novel,  let me alone , from 1930, offers a fictional account of their unhappy union: a young bride, repulsed by her controlling husbands sexual advances, fends him off for as long as she can before surrendering. as callard delicately observes, this novel and later fictional depictions of the marriage draw an unflattering portrait of donald fergusons lack of erotic finesse.

kavan returned to europe, and she began spending time in the company of race-car drivers. she found that she shared their love of dangerous extremes. i realized they were also psychopaths, misfits who played with death because theyd been unable to come to terms with life in the world, she wrote in the autobiographical story world of heroes. it was around this time that she was introduced to heroin. she met and fell in love with the painter stuart edmonds; they wed after her divorce from ferguson was final. she began to write her early, realistic novels, and also started to suffer from severe mental-health problems. in the nineteen-thirties, she attempted suicide multiple times. her illness ultimately led to the failure of her second marriage and treatment in a swiss sanatorium.

the young woman in let me aloneand its sequel,  a stranger still is named anna kavan. when helen woods emerged from her treatment in switzerland, she had taken that name for herself. she now had the spectrally thin physique and the bleached-white hair that would become characteristic of many of her fictional alter egos. (these features also appear in her several self-portraits; kavan painted, too.) years of itinerancy followed: norway, the united states, indonesia, new zealand. on returning to england, in 1943, kavan came under the care of karl theodor bluth, a german physician who regulated her dependency on heroin by legally prescribing her the drug. the two also collaborated on an allegorical work, the horses tale. bluth died in 1964.

ice was published three years later, just as the so-called golden age of science fiction, dominated by white men, was giving way to the new wave of the sixties and seventies. ice eschews fact-based hard science in favor of personal dreamscape, and it twists the hackneyed damsel-in-distress story line prevalent in mid-century space operas into something eerie and demented. kavans contemporary lawrence durrell saw her as a writer in the lineage of virginia woolf and djuna barnes; others have placed ice in the canon of drug novels, along with thomas de quinceys  the confessions of an english opium-eater  and aldous huxleys  brave new world . kavan approved of a readers report from her publisher, which described the book as a mixture of kafka and the avengers.

in his foreword to the anniversary edition, jonathan lethem puts ice on the same shelf as edgar allan poe, kobo abe, and kazuo ishiguro. he also cites j. g. ballards  crash  as a close cousin. i think thats nearest to the mark. both books are bizarre one-off distillations of their creators distinctive world viewand, in each case, that view is animated by a corruption of sexual desire.

the novels title refers not only to the environmental catastrophe of the encroaching walls of ice but also to the emotional numbness of the victimized girl whom the warden and the narrator are vying to possess. the abuse of the girl and the abuse of the environment stem from the same driving male impulse for control and dominance. indeed, the world and the girl are often described in similar terms. the defenseless earth could only lie waiting for its destruction, the narrator writes, echoing an earlier passage about the girl: there was nothing she could do, no one to whom she could appeal. abandoned, helpless, she could only wait for the end.

at the conclusion of the novel, as he is about to take possession of the girl, during the worlds final apocalyptic hours, the narrator tells us, i was pleased with my achievement and with myself. i did not think about the killing involved. if i had acted differently i should never have got here. he adds, in any case, the hour of death had only been anticipated slightly, every living creature would soon perish. the whole world was turning toward death. a half century after its first appearance, kavans fever dream of a novel is beginning to seem all too real.