on november 21, 1852, louise clappe, a new englander who had spent a year at a gold-rush mining camp in the sierra nevada, looked around in awe as she took her leave of the place. in a letter to her sister, she wrote, like an immense concave of pure sapphire without spot or speck, the wonderful and never-enough-to-be-talked-about sky of california drops down upon the whole its fathomless splendor. those words are sung at the end of john adamss new opera, girls of the golden west, which is receiving its premire performances at the san francisco opera. on opening nighta hundred and sixty-five years, to the day, after clappe wrote her letterthe formidable young american soprano julia bullock unfurled gently descending phrases that stretched to the bottom of her range. the orchestra hovered evanescently around her, like the luminous mist that clings to the hills on northern california mornings. this music has an especially piercing effect because it comes in the wake of a cavalcade of horrors. like all of adamss stage works to date, girls of the golden west was directed by peter sellars, who also assembled the libretto. both adams and sellars are california residents, but neither is inclined to romanticize the state. in forty years of collaboration, they have addressed all manner of provocative topicsrichard nixons visit to china, the achille lauro terrorist incident, the 1994 northridge earthquake, the trinity atomic-bomb testyet they have never launched such a frontal assault on our national mythology. the california gold rush was the proving ground of manifest destiny, transmuting rugged individualism into wealth and glory. here it becomes a grotesque bacchanal of white-male supremacy, capped by a fourth of july party that degenerates into a racist riot. clappes closing aria is therefore no rhapsody: the majesty of nature sits in silent judgment. the gold rush has reached the opera stage before. puccinis la fanciulla del west, based on david belascos play the girl of the golden west, was first seen at the met in 1910. sellars had the idea for his latest project after receiving an offer to direct puccinis opera; he became convinced that a franker treatment of the gold rush was needed. the title that sellars and adams chose has proved problematic: some opera patrons are put off by the implicit critique of puccinis chronically underrated score. in fact, golden west is an entirely different beast. it shows a past that is not really past, a hollow myth still in the making.

sellars has lately adopted a documentary style of libretto writing, compiling texts from memoirs, letters, and historical accounts. the method was first applied a decade ago, in doctor atomic, the trinity opera. sellarss approach has displeased many music critics, who prefer the dense, hypnotic librettos that alice goodman wrote for adamss first two operas, nixon in china and the death of klinghoffer. (goodmans work is now available in a volume titled history is our mother, from new york review books.) its worth recalling that those operas, now considered classics, were initially dismissed as artificial and inert. still, golden west seems an uneven, overlong creation. it would strike harder in trimmer form. most of the incidents enacted onstage took place in the sierra nevada in 1851 and 1852. the main source is clappe, whose letters to her sister were later published as a journal, under the pseudonym dame shirley. sellars also drew on miners ballads and on hispanic, african-american, and asian testimonies. dame shirley, as clappe is known in the opera, arrives at a camp with her husband, a physician, and ned peters, a fugitive slave turned cowboy. she encounters a boastful miner named clarence; a hard-drinking lout named joe cannon; ah sing, a chinese prostitute who dreams of settling down with joe; ramn, a mexican hotel bartender; and josefa, ramns lover, who works at the bar. in the dnouement, joe tries to force himself on josefa, who responds by stabbing him to death. she is lynched, and nonwhite miners are driven out of town. a similar incident unfolded in downieville, california, in 1851. the mayhem is reserved for act ii. act i attempts something tricky, which doesnt quite succeed onstage. the idea is to present an off-kilter fantasy of gold-rush life, framed by brechtian distancing. stagehands are seen moving props on and off; anachronisms intrude, including neon beer signs at the hotel bar. dame shirleys interactions with nedportrayed by the sensational young bass-baritone davne tineshave a slapstick, vaudeville character. adams sets all this energetically, but with an excess of lightly bouncing parlando. meditative passages better suit his command of spacious musical landscapes, both interior and exterior. one highlight is dame shirleys description of a young native american woman: with a mocking grace infinitely bewitching she sat upon the ground and smiled up into my face. at such moments, the score extends the free-floating lyrical vein that adams developed in act iii of nixon in china. act ii of golden west is a juggernaut of cumulative menacea structure similar to the transfixing countdown in atomic. surrealist touches augment the atmosphere of nightmare. at the camp, macbeth is being staged for the miners benefit, and we see hallucinatory scenes of dame shirley as lady macbeth (come, you spirits / that tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here) and clarence as macbeth (is this a dagger which i see before me). adamss savage, fractured music makes one long for an entire shakespeare opera from him. ned assumes the voice of frederick douglass, reciting his great, incendiary oration what to a slave is the fourth of july? in that colossal aria, tiness wotanesque voice is underpinned by an orchestra that gestures with beethovenian vehemence. meanwhile, choruses of restless miners, already ominous in act i, become fully demonic, their singsong rhythm reduced to hammering intervals: there is no land upon the earth / contains the same amount of worth. when this braying mob fixes its attention on josefa, ned, and other people of color, it recalls the vengeful crowd in the gospel according to the other mary, adamss crucifixion oratorio. an extraordinary young cast was on hand for the premire. bullock and tines are two of the strongest american actor-singers to emerge in recent years; their instinctive sympathy with adams and sellarss vision recalls prior work by lorraine hunt-lieberson and sanford sylvan. jnai bridges gave a glowing, searing performance as josefa, who responds to the mob with serene fury. elliot madore lent mellow eloquence to ramn; hye jung lee glittered as ah sing. the tenor paul appleby, as joe, caught the desperation behind the characters drunken bravado. ryan mckinny, a fast-rising wagnerian bass-baritone, created a dynamic portrait of clarence, who begins with masculine swagger, becomes a monster by degrees, and ends up a guilt-ridden shell. grant gershon effectively marshalled the orchestra and the chorus, though the edges were rough on opening night. hold on, let me put you on megaphone. girls of the golden west feels more like a first draft than like a finished piece, but it has the raw stuff of a major opera, and rawness is part of its power. what resonates most in donald trumps america is the way that empty, stupid boasting devolves into paranoid rage. the miners who sing lines like weve got the highest mountains here / taller trees, and faster deer could now be scripting political campaigns and team u.s.a. advertising. dame shirley is too wise to perpetuate such rhetoric. at the end, she sees not only purple mountains and that fathomless blue sky but also empty bottles, oyster cans, sardine boxes, broken jars, all manner of debris, the harsher outlines of which are softened off by the thinnest possible coating of radiant snow.