seriousness, for susan sontag, was a flashing machete to swing at the thriving vegetation of american philistinism. the philistinism sprang from our barbarismand our barbarism had conquered the world. todays america, she wrote in 1966, with ronald reagan the new daddy of california and john wayne chawing spareribs in the white house, is pretty much the same yahooland that mencken was describing. intellectuals, doomed to tramp through an absurd century, were to inflict their seriousness on governor reagan and president johnsonand on john wayne, spareribs, and the whole shattered, voluptuous culture. the point was to be serious about power and serious about pleasure: cherish literature, relish films, challenge domination, release yourself into the rapture of sexual needbut be thorough about it. seriousness is really a virtue for me, sontag wrote in her journal after a night at the paris opera. she was twenty-four. decades later, and months before she died, she mounted a stage in south africa to declare that all writers should love words, agonize over sentences, pay attention to the world, and, crucially, be serious. only a figure of such impossible status would dare to glorify a mood. here was a woman who had barged into the culture with valiant attempts at experimental fiction (largely unread) and experimental cinema (largely unseen) and yet whose blazing essays in partisan review and the new york review of books won her that rare combination of aesthetic and moral prestige. she was a youthful late modernist who, late in life, published two vast historical novels that turned to previous centuries for both their setting and their narrative blueprint; and a seer whose prophecies were promptly revised after every bashing encounter with mass callousness and political failure. the vietnam war, polish solidarity, aids , the bosnian genocide, and 9/11 drove her to revoke old opinions and brandish new ones with equal vigor. in retrospect, her positions are less striking than her posethat bold faith in her power as an eminent, vigilant, properly public intellectual to chasten and to instruct. other writers had abandoned their post. so sontag responded to a 1997 survey about intellectuals and their role with a kind of regal pique: what the word intellectual means to me today is, first of all, conferences and roundtable discussions and symposia in magazines about the role of intellectuals in which well-known intellectuals have agreed to pronounce on the inadequacy, credulity, disgrace, treason, irrelevance, obsolescence, and imminent or already perfected disappearance of the caste to which, as their participation in these events testifies, they belong. she held a contrary creed. i go to war, she said a decade after witnessing the siege of sarajevo, because i think its my duty to be in as much contact with reality as i can be, and war is a tremendous reality in our world. behind the extravagant drama, though, was a shivering doubt. her work rustles with the premonition that she was obsolete, that her splendor and style and ferocious brio had been demoted to a kind of sparkling irrelevance. the feeling flared up abruptly, both when she was thrilled by radical action and when she was aghast at public complacency.

for susan sontag, the illusions of the 60s have been dissipated: this was the smiling headline for a profile of sontag in the times . the year was 1980, a hinge for her, and the articleby a twenty-five-year-old michiko kakutaniwas occasioned by the release of  under the sign of saturn , sontags fifth book of nonfiction. although she maintains that her current attitudes are not inconsistent with her former positions, kakutani wrote, miss sontags views have undergone a considerable evolution over the last decade and a half. the gruesome disappointment of the sixties militancy had sent shudders through the left-wing intelligentsia of which sontag had once been a symbol. so the times piece presented a woman of dignified prudence, whose deviations are of the mature, domesticated kind. the sensibility that resides in this particular town house is an eclectic one indeed, kakutani begins, as the piece swivels like a periscope to survey the gleaming appurtenances of the life of the mind: the eight-thousand-volume library, the idiosyncratic record collection, and the portraits of iconic writers who keep watch over sontags desk like benevolent household godswoolf, wilde, proust. and simone weil, the marxist turned mystic who, during the second world war, fled her native france and protested the humiliation of her countrymen by starving herself to death. in 1963, sontag had begun an article on weil, for the first issue of the new york review of books , with a thundering declaration: the culture-heroes of our liberal bourgeois civilization are anti-liberal and anti-bourgeois. so, at that point, was sontag. weil was a specimen, for her, of a fascinating species: the raving writer, the flagellant writer, the writer impaled on ruthless principle. no one who loves life would wish to imitate her dedication to martyrdom, sontag wrote. yet so far as we love seriousness, as well as life, we are moved by it, nourished by it. to love seriousness was to quest for electrifying contact with spiritual and ideological extremes. the piece on weila woman excruciatingly identical with her ideasis a hymn to extremity. extremity shone with the promise of transcendence, which is why sontag strapped herself to the thrashing energies of the sixties. she was enshrined as an intellectual in revolt, unleashing her polemics on the repressive drabness of our liberal bourgeois civilization. along the way, she learned, as she put it, the speed at which a bulky essay in partisan review becomes a hot tip in time . the weil essay, along with pieces on alain resnais, psychoanalysis, camus, and cesare pavese, appeared in sontags first essay collection, which in 1966 boomed cannon-like from the prow of the literary left:  against interpretation . it was crucial to be against: against fustiness, against the horror in vietnam, against the leering excesses and calculated impoverishments of the global capitalist order. in place of a hermeneutics we need an erotics of artsontags phrase from the books title essayis now imprinted on the public imagination because it sent the ecstasies of the youth movement hurtling toward the arena of aesthetic taste. i wish i had a house like yours so i could do something nice with it.  styles of radical will , sontags best book, was published three years later, and contained an essay on godard in which she gave full-throated expression to the spirit of revolution that had swept up the poor, the dark, the sensuous, and the young. the great culture heroes of our time, sontag announced, again, have shared two qualities: they have all been ascetics in some exemplary way, and also great destroyers. this was in 1968the year she flew to hanoi and visited the vietcong, publishing an account in esquire . it was the apex of her militant commitment. although she had long since turned up her nose at the philistine fraud of the american communist party, the north vietnamese had inspired her, the struggle filling her mind with a vision of a changed world. the vietnamese are whole human beings, not split as we are, she marvelled. but, while she was being led around by terse, determined guerrillas, it struck her that her elaborate american appetites for rock and psychology and the new york review of books were marks of the very luxury she longed, in those days, to abolish. i live in an unethical society, she wrote in her journal, that coarsens the sensibilities and thwarts the capacities for goodness of most people but makes available for minority consumption an astonishing array of intellectual and aesthetic pleasures. those who dont enjoy (in both senses) my pleasures have every right, from their side, to regard my consciousness as spoiled, corrupt, decadent. she yearned to be identical to her ideas, to display the punishing consistency of weil, but her ideas jostled and sparked, exploding her sense of what she was, or wanted to be.

this season brings us a sontag collection that scrapes through the varnish of her persona.  debriefing  (farrar, straus & giroux), edited by benjamin taylor, gathers her eleven short stories. it also stages a coup. sontag the fantastically assured dark lady of american letters is guillotined by sontag the punk, sontag the agitated diarist, sontag the perplexed. short fiction was never quite her form, and these stories see her lurching down the page. they catch her between postures, in moments of poignant psychological wobble. this isnt the majestic air of paradox that gallops through her writing on photography or camus or camp but, rather, an aching, moving irresolution. the private sontag has, of course, already been thrust into the light by two volumes of her journals:  reborn  and  as consciousness is harnessed to flesh . they expose her sincerity and self-doubt, and bare the homosexual life about which she was so laboriously coy. and they furnish us with a fuller picture of her early life: the fatherless childhood in arizona, the adolescence in los angeles, the precocity at the university of chicago, and her marriage, at seventeen, to the scholar philip rieff. then, theres the brooding, demanding, but, finally, astonishing woman of letters presented to us by a rising pile of remembrances, notably sigrid nunezs  sempre susan: a memoir of susan sontag  and desperately seeking susan, a now iconic 2005 essay by terry castle in the london review of books . debriefing has a different appeal. the book lies somewhere between the bronze-plated imperiousness of her essays and the veil-yanking satisfactions of the journals. raw, flailing feeling is pinched and styled, sometimes clumsily. the clumsiness is affecting. the satires hereamerican spirits, babyare failures. but in the sad pieces our dauntless aesthete offers us glimpses of her psyche, and of intelligent heroes melting into a sense of sophisticated futility and thwarted feeling. here is a sontag heaving herself through shredded political romances and sapped passions, applying her ardor to disillusionment and drift. old complaints revisited, a story first published in 1974, portrays the agonies of flagging commitment: i want to leave, but i cant. each day i wake up and tell myself today ill write a letter. no, better yet, ill go around and let the organizer know in person that im resigning. my arguments are in order. i review them in my head. anomie is not the problem. attachment is. our narrator is a servile participant in something called the organization but is on the brink of a traumatic break. sontag pitches the i of the story against the shifting, anonymous mass of the members, loyal adherents to an unspecified political ideology. there have been purges and treasons in the past; now what is demandedand insidiously enforcedis discipline. that discipline is political, psychological, and likely pointless, unless the organization was designed simply to demonstrate the power of human perseverance in the face of crushing obstacles. but suffering within the organization rewards the sufferer with a perverse cachet. so a whole political insurgency trudges along, wincing beneath the whip of a relentless sanctimony. the narratorwhose gender is carefully withheldadmits my wish to lead not just a good but a morally intense life, and we see that this is the damning little virtue that makes him or her so vulnerable to the tyranny of the group. this is a tight, asphyxiating seriousness. the narrator had wanted to be a writer. yet the organization promises a purpose: a chance to bring the political will and the starving spirit into shining, total alignment. sontag, glancing at kafka, opts for allegory. she furnishes us with a model of how orthodoxy takes hold of the psyche and begins to twist. the narrator writhes within a fantasy of political commitment, though the political conditions are unripe. the dreamed-of reckoning is impossibly distant. so power is exerted almost entirely within the organization, among its pious militants, generations of whom have clung to their lovely discipline throughout a vast, indifferent history. a lesson flickers at the bottom of the fable. dissent must be set off from dissent, the narrator says. i dissent differently. the idea haunted her. slung between aesthetics and politics, beauty and justice, sensuous extravagance and leftist commitment, sontag sometimes found herself contemplating the obliteration of her role as public advocate-cum-arbiter of taste. to be serious was to stake a belief in attention but, in a world that demands action, could attention be enough? (i wanted to be useful, she remarked of her 1978 book, illness as metaphor.) because she had gone through the conflicts of the sixties, her instinct was to sprint to the barricades and decry quietism as complicity and contentedness as moral failure. this was the logic of movements, of course. but she would live to see them die.

i dont want to satisfy my desire, i want to exasperate it, a character says in unguided tour, which appeared in this magazine in 1977. the story, which bears an open resemblance to the work of donald barthelme, is made up of dialogue between two nameless speakers, and rolls, with gloomy facility, from war to history to art. love, as the opening lines make clear, throbs at the narrative center: i took a trip to see the beautiful things. change of scenery. change of heart. and do you know? what? theyre still there. ah, but they wont be there for long. i know. thats why i went. to say goodbye. whenever i travel, its always to say goodbye. were instantly faced with a question of scale. how, sontag wants to know, can the psyche manage its devotionsto love, but also to the immensity of the world? the problem intensifies, as private loss (change of heart) is stamped dolefully upon the landscape (change of scenery). like actors in godard, sontags characters speak a sighing, allusive language draped with erudition. the action here, if it can be called that, unfolds in a glamorously abstract, vaguely continental universe: theres a dictator, a piazza, a warand souvenirs, cathedrals, and the exiled leader of a liberation front. (when she later made a filmed version of the storythe fourth and last of her filmsshe shot it in venice.) the trial is next week, so now theyre having demonstrations. cant you see the banner? but the political intrigue is muffled, distant, a chic ripple in sensibility. these are privileged people. they ransack the planet in a ravenous search for stimulation, an act that churns experience to an exhausted, cosmopolitan sludge. they lament this. in their drained world, theres nothing but the memory of love, the memory of joyand the memory, strangely, of a socialist hope. we can march in their workers festivals, one says airily to the other, and sing the internationale, for even we know the words. even we know the words: political solidarity shrivels into pantomime. the gestures are wooden and rote. intelligence has spent itself, plunging into a kind of spiritual insolvency. and history, offered up for the delectation of sontags protagonists, is revealed to be a miserable fetish, one of the more disastrous forms of unrequited love. unguided tour, like old complaints revisited and six other stories in debriefing, were collected in the only other book of sontags stories, i, etcetera, from 1978. the title is telling. so is the year. a decade had passed since the peak of the youth movement, with which she had declared a gallant sympathy. many of these stories, then, are stalked by the memory of an age of revolution: the shrieking climax and thudding bathos, the militant action and miserable defeat, the struck postures and private sacrificeall the desperate palpitations of a heart hurled at the world.

the final portrait above sontags desk in 1980hanging beside woolf, wilde, proust, and weilwas of the german jewish writer walter benjamin, who sulks beautifully at the center of sontags essay under the sign of saturn. it is the key to  later essays  (library of america), a new volume that collects her last five books, excepting the novels, and trembles with melancholy. benjamin was loosely attached to the frankfurt school: a coterie of marxist scholars that included theodor adorno, max horkheimer, and herbert marcuse (the last of whom shared a house with sontag and her then husband in cambridge, massachusetts). the group rose to radical prestige in weimar germany by piercing the skin of bourgeois ideology with their glinting dialectical acuity. soon they were forced to flee. many of them settled at universities in the united states, but benjamin, devotee of baudelaire and translator of proust, insisted on going to parisand died while escaping to spain. i felt i was describing myself, sontag told kakutani about the benjamin essay. im trying to tell the truth, but of course i know i am drawn to the part of people that reminds me of myself. that part was probably benjamins lavish intellectual appetite and tragic posture. his political intensity bloomed with feeling but also romantic contradiction; his writing revels in an astral sorrow. i came into the world, he once proclaimed, under the sign of saturnthe star of the slowest revolution, the planet of detours and delays. he struck sontag as fiercely serious, and something like his tenebrous sophistication rolls through all her books. he was drawn to communism but preferred reading poetry to reading marx; flashes of him can be glimpsed both in the shuddering militant of old complaints revisited and in the weary flneurs of unguided tour, who sigh along to anthems because they havent forgotten the words. sontags essay concludes with a striking interpretation of benjamins essay on the viennese critic karl kraus which serves as a prcis of her own political fate: benjamin asks rhetorically: does kraus stand on the frontier of a new age? alas, by no means. for he stands on the threshold of the last judgment. benjamin is thinking of himself. at the last judgment, the last intellectualthat saturnine hero of modern culture, with his ruins, his defiant visions, his reveries, his unquenchable gloom, his downcast eyeswill explain that he took many positions and defended the life of the mind to the end, as righteously and inhumanly as he could. the essay is from 1978, the same year as  i, etcetera . that is to say, three years after the official vietcong victory, which prompted sontags exhausted ambivalence. in benjamins intellectual style, or her rather idiosyncratic understanding of it, she had found a trapdoor in the roaring malevolence of history, the chance to be blistering but vulnerablethe chance, that is, to dissent differently. im just afraid if i die and go to heaven there wont be anyone i know. four years later, speaking at town hall, in manhattan_,_ sontag condemned communism as fascism with a human face, andon a stage she shared with e. l. doctorow, allen ginsberg, pete seeger, and gore vidaldeclared that people on the left have willingly or unwillingly told a lot of lies. the promises of the sixties, for her, had curdled. although sontag, like benjamin, was never reconciled to the cruelties of capitalist society, she felt betrayed by its looming alternative. she couldnt possibly resign herself to an uncommitted aestheticism. but she tried. sontag had told kakutani in 1980 that political disengagement might prompt the culture to produce good, and not simply urgent, art: we now have a situation where people are denied the hectic consolations of being part of movements. sontag claimed to cherish this new loneliness, since in the end the life of a writer is very solitary. the statement is unlike her and was promptly forgotten. but you can hear in it the longing for something beyond the saturnine luminosity of benjamin and the saintly self-martyrdom of weil. a playfulness, perhapsor, at least, a lightness of touch. later essays contains two pieces on roland barthes. he traipsed through postwar intellectual voguesstructuralism, semiologyand revelled, finally, in his own trilling peculiarities, an unrepentant aesthete. he lacks anything like walter benjamins tragic awareness that every work of civilization is also a work of barbarism, sontag wrote in 1982, at a period in her life when she was becalmed between causes. barthes, whom she had known, was for her a chuckling intellectual counterweight to her own erudite woe. this was a man not tormented by the catastrophes of modernity or tempted by its revolutionary illusions, who refers to the present literary era as a moment of gentle apocalypse.  such gentleness and humor and freedom from torment: these were traits she could admire but never quite claim.

 a ids and its metaphors , sontags 1989 book and her next after under the sign of saturn, announced her return, if not to militancy, then to advocacy. the aids epidemic serves as an ideal projection for first world political paranoia, she reported with alarm. the book is a bit pat, the arguments often self-evidentbut it shoved sontag back into the arena of political contest, her precious aloneness having been crumbled by collective suffering. the world had again been shattered, this time by a syndrome that was tearing through sub-saharan africa and the homosexual demimondethat is, through populations already damaged by negligence or singled out for contempt by the same forces of reaction that sontag had charged at twenty years before. she recognized this. she was struck by the phrasing employed by the foreign minister of apartheid south africa: the terrorists are now coming to us with a weapon more terrible than marxism: aids . and she was appalled that the reactionaries in her own countrypat buchanan, jerry falwell, norman podhoretzderived a cackling vindication from pursuing one of the main activities of the so-called neoconservatives, the kulturkampf against all that is called, for short (and inaccurately), the 1960s, as they regarded aids as a punishment for the freedoms won by a rebellious age. the most gratifying insights of  aids and its metaphors spring from this revelation of historical continuity, a sense that the old alliances, on behalf of the exploited and the despised, could be defrosted by political emergency. which is perhaps why the story in debriefing that makes aids its explicit subject, the way we live now, is also the strongest. published in this magazine in 1986, it grasps the vastness and urgency of the crisis while noting its infinitesimal effects on the lives it disrupts. devastating triviality and muddled sentiment scuttle through an account of a dying man and his friends. the man is never named: and among those who came or checked in by phone every day, the inner circle as it were, those who were getting more points, there was still a further competition, which was what was getting on betsys nerves, she confessed to jan; theres always that vulgar jockeying for position around the bedside of the gravely ill, and though we all feel suffused with virtue at our loyalty to him (speak for yourself, said jan), to the extent that were carving time out of every day, or almost every day, though some of us are dropping out, as xavier pointed out, arent we getting at least as much out of this as he is. that he is stretched among the rattling psyches of betsy, jan, quentin, tanya, paolo, xavier. the storys sentences are often like the one abovelong, recursive, pocked by little objections and ricocheting between conflicting accounts. the single, powerful willthat reservoir of beautiful seriousnesshas evaporated. here, then, is a stifled kind of suffering, revealed in its power to inspire compassion and vanity and dread. people are storing their own blood, for future use, sontag remarks in  aids and its metaphors. the old model of altruismdonating blood anonymouslyhad been undermined by the epidemic. self-interest now receives an added boost as simple medical prudence. so theres a marvellous smallness to the way we live now. what seems like love for the weakened, nameless protagonist turns into cynicism and selfishness. perhaps, she suggests, that selfishness is built into this particular crisis seizing these particular people in their particular eraan era that wallows in the aftermath of dashed collective hope. this is an annihilating, spiritual fatigue. and it grips julia, a mordant, troubled woman, from the title story of debriefing. sontags style here is drifting and elegant, bearing a glimmering likeness to the work of her friend elizabeth hardwick. (she used to speak of putting more lizzie in her prose.) julia thrashes, moans, acts out, seems to dissolve into and finally reject the world. she throws herself at mysticism, withdraws from reason, and yet manages, still, to make people love her. among those people is the narrator: the woman watching, feeling, trying to reason and haggle and intervene with julia, trying to pay effortful, serious attention. the effort fails but is not, perhaps, useless. as the narrator admits near the storys end, i want to save my soul, that timid wind.