youtube

aka wyatt cenac

i have maybe eight categories for things that i love, and this new web series from wyatt cenac falls under jane austen. the show is both childish and observationally very sharp. in it, cenac, who plays a version of himself, is a part-time superhero vigilante who, with the help of his friends, defends his brooklyn neighborhood from crime. the neighborhood was once a tight-knit, lower-middle-class black community, but it has recently changed into a stomping ground for obnoxious yuppies. the crime-fighting has become complicated and absurd. cenac is a former correspondent on  the daily show , although thats not how i know his work. what i know about him is either from npr, from friends, or both, i cant remember. but  aka wyatt cenac  stands out to me not only because its the only show that ive seen this year but also because im picky about what i like, and i really loved this show. liana finck

photograph courtesy cbc

schitts creek

on these dark november evenings there is really only one thing i want to do: open my laptop, fire up netflix, and lose myself in the loopy genius of catherine oharas line readings on the canadian sitcom  schitts creek . not since madeline kahn , in  clue , spoke of flames on the side of her face has anyone made me laugh so much by dint of sheer diction. as moira rose, a washed-up soap-opera star in kabuki-white pancake makeup and an astounding array of bad wigs, ohara is at once clipped and breathy, in hysterics one moment and cool as a cucumber the next. she aspirates letters that you didnt think could be aspirated, pronounces cant like kant (except for when she doesnt), and uses questionable invented expressions like exposed to the world like a moroccan fair, as in, while the rooms were exposed to the world like a moroccan fair, someone got in here and stole my earrings!

the rooms she is referring to are in a motel in schitts creek, a town that moiras husband, the video-store magnate johnny rose ( eugene levy , in anxious deadpan) bought for pocket change as a joke, years earlier. the laugh is now on him: the roses have lost their fortune thanks to an indiscreet business manager and must decamp to schitts creek, their one remaining asset, with their grownup children, alexis ( annie murphy , who makes a lovable spoiled brat) and david ( dan levy , eugenes real-life son, with the eyebrows to prove it). the show, which was created by the levy father-and-son team, had its first season in 2015, just as out-of-touch lite was becoming a political catchphrase the world over, and its comedy comes from the city-mouse/country-mouse tensions that arise between the preposterous roses and the humble townsfolk they now find themselves among. its easy to imagine a version of this premise where things get ugly, fast. but schitts creek is gentler and happier than what weve come to expect from most contemporary comedy. its tone is silly and ruefully affectionate, not bitter. its canadian, after all. alexandra schwartz

photograph by yuri hasegawa / redux

ball in the family

anyone with a passing interest in basketball is well aware of lavar ball , the outspoken patriarch for whom fatherhood and empire-building are one and the same. the short version: he found a tall, athletic woman to marry, had three sons in quick succession, and immediately began training them for basketball greatness. (ball, by the way, is his real name.) he swore that all three would become n.b.a. stars. a potent mixture of hard work and magical thinking, balls mission is succeeding. his eldest son, lonzo , was selected second in this years n.b.a. draft and is now launching his career with the los angeles lakers. the younger ball brothers, liangelo and lamelo , are on track for basketball stardom as well. yet the wholesome storybook quality of this familys rise has a dark side. ball has become a public nemesis, part villain and part punch line. hes drawn ire from the sports-watching community by turning his sons careers into lucrative spectacles, launching a clothing and sneaker line (big baller brand), buying his young sons flashy cars, constantly sparring with the press and with referees, and demonstrating a general antagonism toward the fragile traditions of sportsmanship.

no surprise,  ball in the family  is produced by the same team behind  keeping up with the kardashians . the show succeeds in giving the family patriarch a sympathetic dimension. it airs in delectable fifteen-to-eighteen-minute bites and mostly coasts on the gentle, slapstick humor of a traditional family sitcom, with pitch-perfect spikes of low- and high-stakes drama. lamelo, the youngest son, offers near-constant comic relief with his pubescent shrieks and refusal to discuss his girlfriend on camera. his father comes across less like a fame-hungry drill sergeant than an energetic cheerleader full of positivity and self-determination. at one point in the show, his wife, tina , suffers a massive stroke, and he embarks on the heartbreaking mission of coaching her through a recovery. thats your mom, he tells the boys. but thats my girl, and i got her. part of the thrill of watching ball in the family is the unspoken understanding of everything that hangs in the balance for the ball family. there are real stakes here to be measured beyond fame and money, neither of which will secure tinas recovery or put points on the scoreboard for the boys. lavar ball is fighting a real fight. theres no choice but to root for him. carrie battan

in search of new tv shows? every thursday, our writers and editors tell you about the shows theyre watching. browse the new yorker recommends to discover more cultural recommendations from our staff.