the most followed players on the platform twitch earn well into seven figures. illustration by andy rementer audio: listen to this story. to hear more feature stories, download the audm app for your iphone.

one humid morning this past summer, omeed dariani drove his black tesla sedan through the foothills east of san diego, looking apprehensive. dariani is the founder and c.e.o. of online performers group, a talent-management company dedicated to professional video-game streamers, who broadcast their game play and commentary live over the internet. he is thirty-eight, with a dry, ironic wit and a nervous habit of twirling his goatee, which is rapidly going gray; his clients are, for the most part, young, boisterous, and unpredictable. that day, he was on his way to meet the streamer roberto garcia, who was supposed to be at home but had instead gone to a casino outside the city to celebrate his girlfriends birthday. darianis speedometer crept toward ninety miles per hour. we just need to get there before he starts to drink, he said. garcia, known online as towelliee, is a star broadcaster on twitch, a streaming platform whose popularity has turned recreational gaming into an improbably viable career. each month, a hundred million visitors watch their favorite personalities play video games on twitch, spending an average of nearly two hours a day there. this audience is large enough to make the site one of the twenty most trafficked in the u.s., yet its perhaps more apt to measure twitch against a different medium. with viewership numbers that rival those of msnbc or cnn, twitch is less like a conventional web site than like a kaleidoscopic television network: thousands of channels at once, broadcasting live at every hour of the day. shortly before noon, dariani pulled up in front of the viejas casino & resort and handed his keys to a valet. he strode inside, eyes scanning the acres of slot machines. though dariani is chummy and non-judgmental with clients, hes seen enough drunk streamers fall off balconies at industry parties to inspire an almost parental anxiety. he glanced at his phone, and then showed me an eclectically punctuated text from garcia. thats probably not a good sign of sobriety, he said. yet when garcia appearedbearded, stout, and wearing aviator sunglasseshe was convivial but composed. i just watched my girlfriend lose nine hundred dollars in about three minutes, he announced cheerfully. garcia led us up to the casinos presidential suite, where his girlfriend, aracely, was waiting at the bar. when garcia started streaming, in 2010, hed recently been laid off from a quality-assurance job at a pharmaceutical-software company; he and aracely scraped by on unemployment checks and her wages from costco. game broadcasting was new, and the business model all but nonexistent. still, garcia thought that he could make it work, so he sat aracely down to convince her. imagine telling your girlfriend, im going to stop looking for a job and play video games for a living,  he told me. aracely, sitting beside him, nodded. it was a hard conversation, she said. game streaming, garcia discovered, required non-stop work. the only way to attract viewers, and to prevent the ones you had from straying to other broadcasters, was to be online constantly, so he routinely streamed for eighteen hours a day. thats what i had to do to grow the viewership, he said. his ankles swelled from sitting at his computer. his weight grew to four hundred and twenty pounds. garcias specialty is the multiplayer fantasy game world of warcraft. while he isnt its best player, he has a knack for talking entertainingly over his play: he is funny, brash, and filled with stories about his delinquent childhood in newark. (i was so bad, i got kicked out of the dare program, he told me.) after a year of broadcasting, he had a steady audience of seven hundred, but he was still desperately broke. during a stream, he asked viewers to help him hang on a little longer. one sent him fifteen hundred dollarsa gift that reduced garcia to tears. i had to shut my mike off and walk away, he said. everyone was, like, whered he go? is he dead from the donation?  six years later, garcia makes several times that amount on a good day. since 2011, he has been one of twitchs partners, an lite group that includes some twenty-five thousand streamers, of the 2.2 million active on the site. between his thousands of subscriberswho pay a monthly fee for access to perks such as ad-free viewingand his sponsorships, appearance fees, and tips, he earns a low- to mid-six-figure income. his streaming schedule has become more manageable, though it remains arduous: sixty hours a week, no days off except occasional saturdays. he has devoted nearly thirty thousand hours to world of warcraft. im a grinder, man, he told me. to sponsors, twitch offers a novel opportunity: access to a generation that resists traditional advertising media but is steeped in video games. young people watch game streaming in huge numbers (twitch claims to reach half of the millennial males in the united states) and often in prodigious quantities. this year, towelliees viewers have watched five hundred and ninety-four years of his content, dariani said. in 2016, garcia sold nearly three million dollars worth of his sponsors products through links on his twitch channel. for all the traffic and revenue that twitch generates, the game-streaming market remains a free-for-all, its driven, rambunctious broadcasters struggling to manage their newfound success. dariani aims to become streamings william morrisa pioneering talent manager who leads a new class of entertainer into professionalism. already, his best-paid clients can earn two million dollars a year; some command twenty thousand dollars to play a studios game for a single three-hour stream. executives both covet and fear twitch broadcasters influence. this eighteen-year-old punk kid shows up, dariani told me, describing a typical meeting with potential sponsors, and hes talking about how things are retarded and making fart jokes and not listening to your team with a hundred years of experience. and youre sitting there going, this is the guy who makes the decision about whether my company succeeds or fails?  dariani smiled. first youre angry. but then youre terrified.

online performers groups office sits on the top floor of a putty-gray building in san diegos point loma neighborhood, less than a mile from the airport; the roar of plane traffic frequently interrupts conversation. we call it the point loma pause, dariani said. it gives you time to reflect. one recent afternoon, oliver pascual, an account manager, stood at his desk watching a clients stream of a game called farming simulator 17. onscreen, a grimy blue tractor hauled a trailer through an autumnal pasture. people like watching him farm stuff, pascual explained, shrugging. hes literally looking for a place to dump grass right now. i keep telling you, poppy-seed bagels are nothing but trouble. nearby, a whiteboard listed dozens of pending deals, including projects with intel and logitech. on the opposite wall, a huge television showed a client called professorbroman broadcasting the sci-fi blockbuster destiny 2 for an audience of six thousand. (a few days later, another client, kinggothalion, would play destiny 2 in a marathon stream that attracted more than half a million viewers.) meanwhile, on a love seat in the waiting area, the streamer cinthya alicea, who broadcasts as cincinbear, toyed idly with her blue hair extensions as she chatted with employees about an upcoming cruise to mexico to which o.p.g. was treating its clients and staff. outside a doorway warning  keep out : omeeds private volcano lair, dariani stood in his typical outfit of t-shirt, jeans, and sandals. his wife, jennifer, a harvard history-of-science ph.d. who is o.p.g.s chief operating officer, emerged from the adjacent office with news that another streamer had just signedthe tenth in the past week, nearly doubling their client count, to twenty-four. the two paused a moment, mulling the extra work that this would entail. thats great, dariani said, uncertainly. darianis usual demeanor is one of skeptical diligence. the son of an iranian father and an oklahoman mother, he dropped out of the university of virginia in 2000 and spent years working for the companies that make the card games magic: the gathering and yu-gi-oh!. in 2012, he joined sony online entertainment as a global brand manager. on his first day there, he recalled, the president of his division spoke with the marketing team: he starts yelling at us, if you marketing fuckers dont figure out this twitch thing, were going to get buried!  but twitch resisted easy figuring out. the service began less as a commercial venture than as a piece of performance art. in 2007, a group of recent yale graduates concocted the idea of broadcasting every moment of the co-founder justin kans life, through a web site that they called justin.tv. for nine months, from a camera attached to his hat, kan beamed out live video of everything he did (except for bodily necessities), using a streaming tool that the group had developed. the stunt eventually wore thin, but viewers kept asking for a way to live-stream their own exploits. to the founders surprise, what users wanted most was to broadcast themselves playing video games. it became the tail that wagged the dog, emmett shear, a co-founder and twitchs current c.e.o., later told the times . it ended up taking over our whole company. in 2014, amazon acquired the service, which had been renamed twitch, for nine hundred and seventy million dollars. it now has more than twelve hundred employees. generally speaking, a twitch stream is not riveting entertainmentor even, to the uninitiated, all that comprehensible. click on a channel, and what you will encounter is routine game play, along with two other frames: a miniature box showing the face of the streamer, who provides occasional commentary; and, to the right, a chat window that scrolls with the indecipherable speed of a spinning game-show wheel. the streamer, seated before his computer, might grow animated as he reacts to the game, but just as often he is fixated and still, his expressionless face blue-lit by monitor glow. even dariani struggled at first to make sense of the site. i started watching a lot of streams, he recalled, and it was, like, guy with a beard, another guy with a beard, another guy with a beard. theyre all heads in boxes playing the same game. the central mystery of twitch, at least to newcomers, is why anyone would choose to watch such a thing, when he could play the game instead. twitchs spokesman, who goes only by chase, argued, thats like saying to a chef, why are you watching the food network? shouldnt you be in the kitchen, cooking? or to an athlete, why are you watching espn? shouldnt you be out shooting hoops? no. people enjoy watching others who are good at what they do. the deeper draw to twitch, however, is its capacity for interactivity. it was this function that intrigued dariani. when he gave presentations on twitch to sony executives, he often displayed a stream behind himand then, after a while, sent a chat message to the broadcaster, who returned his greeting on camera: hey, omeed! this invariably made the executives sit up. all of a sudden, you see the power of the medium, dariani said. imagine you watch a television show and the show literally talks back to you, customized to what you want to hear. dariani e-mailed dozens of broadcasters, asking what they would charge to play sonys games on their streams. they were completely random numbers, he recalled. the smallest guy wanted twenty-five thousand dollars. the biggest guy said, ill do it for freejust send me a copy. i was, like, theres no plan here.  in order to make contacts, dariani set up shop in dive bars near gaming conventions and invited broadcasters to talk over free food and drinks. what they all told him, he remembers, was, we dont know what were doing, we dont know anybody, and were terrified. in 2014, dariani left sony and began representing a few streamers part time. at the beginning of last year, dariani had one employee, and worked from his dining-room table. the company now has a staff of thirteen, along with an array of analytics tools. its software can tell clients what hours are best for them to stream (twitchs viewership peaks before noon, when the north american and european crowds intersect), what their audiences viewing habits are, and what their sponsorship time is worth (1.1 cents per viewer per minute). one morning, jennifer dariani showed me a widget that theyd created which ranks, in live time, the best games for clients to play in order to maximize viewers. o.p.g. earns its commission from clients sponsorships. a healthy twitch channel, dariani says, should make about half its revenue from subscriptions and tips and the other half from promotional work. in recent months, this pool of sponsorship money has deepened considerably, as companies, from game studios to energy-drink brands and fast-food chains, rush to purchase streamers influence. when i visited o.p.g., a studio had just signed a deal for two hundred thousand dollars a month. in the car one evening, dariani fumed that a company had asked to fly a client to japan for an event, offering a four-thousand-dollar fee for a weeks work. no, dariani had replied. thats the rate he gets per day . in the next few years, dariani expects, the annual marketing expenditure on twitch streamers will surpass a billion dollars. by his rough estimate, two thousand broadcasters are already making a middle-class income through twitch; he has seen clients turn down fifty thousand dollars for a two-hour convention appearance because they didnt want to deal with the travel. the amount of money in content creation is ludicrous, david martinez, an acquaintance of darianis who manages the streamer and youtuber ryan northernlion letourneau, told me. its one thing to make a living playing video games. its another thing to be people like us who make a living off those people, and live comfortably. its fucking crazy.

this august, i accompanied dariani on a visit to his client anthony kongphanwhom he described, with some managerial embellishment, as the hottest commodity on twitch right now. (despite placing only two hundred and seventieth in the sites rankings, kongphan was gaining several thousand followers a day.) on a hilltop northeast of portland, oregon, kongphan showed us into a modern exurban house that he shares with two other broadcasters. inside, a thick layer of dust coated what little furniture was in evidence: two tables pushed awkwardly against a wall. a dining area had been converted into a makeshift bedroom, illuminated by a set of shoebox-size photography lights on telescoping stands. mail and packages lay in unopened piles. dariani nodded. this is a pretty typical streamer house, he said. kongphan, who is thirty-two, stands out amid twitchs largely sallow, nondescript streamer base. lithe and tattooed, with an impeccably spiked crest of black hair, he is a former model and actor who once had a part on the young and the restless. after struggling to break through in hollywood, kongphan saw a friend streaming and decided to try it. he spent years building an audience, delivering pizzas on the side. i will never do it again, but i streamed once for sixty-three and a half hours straight, kongphan told me. now he broadcasts every day from early evening to around 4 a . m. i just wake up, eat, work out, and then stream, he said. recently, hed hired his older sister to work as his assistant, doubling the salary she made at an insurance company. in the living room, dariani spotted a box of samples from the st. louis coffee company madrinas, which had been courting kongphan. dariani looked vexed; hed forwarded the package months before. always love seeing the stuff you sent them that they didnt even open, he said. he unsealed the box and extended a can of cold-brew coffee to kongphan. dude, try it. they want to pay you so much money. if you dont like it, we wont do it. kongphan, who doesnt drink coffee, eyed it warily before taking a sip. thats not bad, actually, he said. it works really well with late-night streaming, dariani replied. can in hand, kongphan led us up to his studio. at the top of the stairs, an enormous translucent purple dildo sat mounted on the wall like a floppy trophy head. oh, kongphan said, registering it. yeah. dont mind that. unlike the rest of the house, kongphans studio was almost obsessively tidy. on his desk, a container of clorox wipes rested beside a copy of heated beat, an erotic novel, discovered by his then-girlfriend, that features a stock photo of kongphan on the cover. (kongphans former girlfriend is also a streamer, a common situation; non-streamer partners often wont tolerate the jobs demanding hours.) thick black curtains blocked the evening light. kongphan sat down in front of an array of four computer monitors and clicked a button to alert his followers that he was about to start streaming. fans surged in, filling the chat window with emotessmall, emoji-like images that are twitchs preferred mode of expression. (kongphans emotes, available only to his subscribers, are largely ninja-themed, matching his channels graphics.) kongphan put on a gaming headset and leaned in to the microphone above his keyboard. the moment the video feed kicked in, his demeanor brightened. hello, hello, everyone! he called out, grinning. what up? twitch is alive! for ten minutes, he mostly greeted viewers, calling them out by name: revtomato! muntface! nick! razer! like all of darianis clients, kongphan is a variety streamer. while some broadcasters focus exclusively on one game (and consequently lose viewers if that games popularity declines), variety streamers switch titles freely, succeeding on the strength of their charisma. their audiences arent just there to watch them play league of legends, dariani said. theyre there because they like that person. this congeniality makes variety streamers much more appealing to sponsors. whereas some high-level gamers grow too focussed on matches to speak, streamers like kongphan are as garrulous as morning-radio hosts, able to talk enthusiasticallyand to boost productsfor hours. kongphans audience is so loyal and adoring (some fans have tipped him more than ten thousand dollars over time, or watched him stream for twenty-four hours straight) that his channel can resemble a benign personality cult, built around a carefully honed version of himself: engaged, jokey, ceaselessly positive. it helps, of course, that kongphan is also a highly skilled gamer, his reflexes sharpened by thousands of hours of practice and enhanced by a diet of his own devising. (it involves a lot of chicken breast.) in his studio, he started up playerunknowns battlegrounds, a game that twitch helped propel to success. in battlegrounds, matches begin with a hundred players, who scrounge weapons and supplies from a constantly shrinking map; the last player left alive wins. kongphan is almost always that playereven though he is only half paying attention. as he played, fingers clacking across the keyboard, his eyes flicked periodically from the screen to his chat monitor, so that he could keep up a steady patter with his audience. would you rather have spatulas for hands or have to fight 10 midgets on pcp? one viewer asked. kongphan, still shooting enemies, presided over the ensuing debate. the broadcaster burkeblack told me, streaming on twitch is a game of its owna puzzle that requires specialized skills and strategies. the lifeblood of a twitch channel is its subs: broadcasters get a share of every five-dollar monthly subscription. according to streamers i spoke with, that share ranges from fifty to seventy per cent, depending on their popularity. for every twitch star earning seven figures, there are thousands struggling to figure out how to lure enough subscribers to survive. do they need a gimmick? should they play different games? interact more with chat? theres no right answer, daniel ikasperr bong, a longtime streamer, told me. the audience gets to choose what they want to watch, and its almost like putting our fate in their hands. its scary. perhaps the best embodiment of the effort to master twitch is ben cassell, o.p.g.s first client, who broadcasts, as cohhcarnage, from his farmhouse in north carolina. after nearly quitting twitch in 2013, when sixteen-hour streams werent winning him an audience, cassell instead dedicated himself to research. this medium is brand new, he explained. theres nowhere to go to see how to succeed on twitch. so he built data-tracking software, and studied scheduling, game selection, and the markets niches: hard-core professional gamers, lighthearted jesters, boobie streamers, histrionic yellers, baseball-cap-wearing frat bros. based on his findings, cassell reinvented his channel as upbeat and safe-for-work; to followers, he told me, my channel is cheers.  every dayand he has logged more than fourteen hundred in a row, including the one on which his first child was bornhe begins his stream at 8 a . m ., right before twitchs audience crests. cassell now has four full-time employees, along with a squad of contractors: artists, coders, sound technicians. the graphics on his channel, from the splashy title sequence to the customized overlays for each game, wouldnt be out of place on cable television. paid moderators scrub any toxicity from his chat window. while he streams, he monitors a variety of applications so that every decision is optimized. twitch is not if you build it, they will come,  he said. its like surfing, where you have to go to the waves. hey, guys! this cave is actually a tunnel to the twenty-first century!

in the early morning of february 19th, the virginia broadcaster brian vigneault stepped away from his twitch stream, telling his viewers that he was taking a cigarette break. at the time, vigneault, a thirty-five-year-old father of three, had been live for twenty-two hours of a charity stream that was planned to last a full day. the broadcast never resumed; later, vigneaults body was found in his virginia beach home. many of his peers speculated that he had suffered a heart attack from too many marathon streams. months later, it emerged that hed died of an overdose of the opioid fentanyl. yet the speculation had not been implausible; several broadcasters, including one of darianis clients, have suffered heart attacks while streaming. what we do is not healthy, burkeblack told me. at this summers pax westa yearly convention that inundates downtown seattle with gaming fansvirtually every streamer i spoke with voiced concerns about the health risks of overwork. my doctor told me i was going to die if i kept doing it like this, a young broadcaster who goes by bria leigh said. you spend ten hours a day in the chair. and you dont even want to get up to use the bathroom, because youre afraid youll lose viewers. on the convention floor, thousands of gamers, many in costume as bionic angels and blue-skinned assassins, waited in line to play demos and to pose with any of a half-dozen colossal sculpted dragons, which developers had brought to promote games. outside twitchs area, sonja reid, a canadian streamer known as omgitsfirefoxx, signed game consoles for fans and posed for selfies in yellow-tinted sunglasses. reid is the most popular female broadcaster on twitch, with close to a million followers. (this places her sixty-sixth in the sites rankings; twitchs broadcasters, like its viewers, are overwhelmingly male.) but later, away from her fans, she told me that she was stepping back from twitch. i got burned out, she said. i wasnt doing anything else with my life. i wasnt going outside. i was spending all my time on the internet. reid also had to contend with a gaming culture that can be shockingly hostile to women. like bria leigh, she had been stalked by viewers. shed been doxxed, her personal information revealed online. many female broadcasters cope with sexual solicitation and other forms of harassment. the streamer cinthya alicea matter-of-factly told me what it was like to be swatteda vicious prank in which trolls anonymously report a made-up threat to police, summoning a swat team to a targets home. as alicea streamed, officers stormed into her house and put her in handcuffs. im just thankful they didnt shoot my dog, she said. for dariani, protecting his charges is a constant concern. several times, i saw him and his wife implore clients to let them take work off their hands. need prizes shipped to viewers? we can do gift fulfillment for you. forgot to bring toiletries to the conference? heres a kit with toothpaste, purell, and multivitamins. when kongphan mentioned wanting to move to austin, texas, dariani volunteered to find him a house. these streamers dont have anybody in their corner, dariani told me. we need to be that person. the darianis own a rental condo on the beach in san diego, and they offer it for free to clients who need time away. no one has ever accepted. they just dont take vacations, jennifer dariani said. to help break this trend, o.p.g. recently devised a plan to pay clients to take up to ten days off a year. streamers accept the difficult conditions because they know that success requires them to allow fans constant access: for viewers, a twitch channel is not just entertainment but also a virtual community, which functions only when its most important member is online. gaming began, decades ago, as a social experience, in arcades and on living-room sofas. but as games have become more lushly immersive and complexoften designed to reward thousands of hours of playthey have in many ways become more isolating, encouraging solitude and, for some gamers, loneliness. twitch has succeeded because it made gaming feel communal again. as chase, twitchs spokesman, told me, were essentially a social network for the gaming age. garcia and cassell both like to compare their channels to a neighborhood pub. streamers become favorite bartenders, charming and constantly available. viewers, swapping messages in chat, become fellow-regulars. there might be the occasional bar fighttwitch can be as noxious as anywhere else on the internetbut the tone is typically convivial. viewers generate inside jokes, ask for life advice, even discuss their experiences of grief or depression. (they also pair off, as two of cassells moderators did.) there are two ways to look at twitch, cassell told me. one is that its people playing video games and other people watching, which is what ninety-nine per cent of the world sees. but the other side of twitch is that you are playing a game with someone on the couch. theres a level of interaction thats just not there in standard media. this interaction has an unusual kind of immediacy: participate enough in cassells twitch channel, and hell greet you by name, every day. if you asked a hundred viewers why they watch their favorite streamer, what theyre all going to tell you is, i feel like i could be their friend,  cecilia danastasio, who covers twitch for the gaming site kotaku, said. michael blight, a depaul university communications professor whose research has explored viewers bonds with twitch streamers, told me that these largely one-sided parasocial relationships grow deeply meaningful. people were almost sheepish about revealing this, but theyd say, i know im just one of his thousands of fans, but i really do feel like he understands me,  blight said. they come to feel like this person is a part of them.