as these lines accumulated, i was overcome by the sense that their author and i were complicit in the sad but necessary business of guiding the individualistic isabel toward her downfall. its a fatal kind of puppetry; after the radicalism of the modernists, the notion of comeuppance has become the province of genre fiction. (just as a stray example, consider how arbitrary the tragedies of the great gatsby ultimately seem.) joyces ulysses, as t. s. eliot told virginia woolf, was a landmark because it destroyed the whole of the nineteenth century. i had thought james, modernisms most crucial precursor, exempt from that assessment. but on my second reading, he struck me, strangely, as in fact the very opposite, one of the last pure tragedians, using his majestically immaculate narrative to press isabel archer through the machinery of her ordained fate. near the end of the novel, isabel sits at ralphs deathbed, sobbing, having conceded her culpability. oh yes, she tells him through her tears. ive been punished.

what changed between my readings? my own credulity, perhaps. what i had taken for realism now seemed like melodrama; scarcely a scene in the first quarter of the novel fails to foreshadow isabels ultimate punishment. you havent suffered, and youre not made to suffer, ralph tells his cousin. i hope youll never see the ghost! isabel herself displays an accelerating arrogance. whenever i feel grand, she says, after something rather grand has happened to her, it will be for a better reason. even james shows his hand: it may be affirmed without delay that isabel was probably very liable to the sin of self-esteem. . . . at moments she discovered she was grotesquely wrong, and then she treated herself to a week of passionate humility. after this she held her head higher than ever again.

one mark of a masterpiece is that it doesnt stay where you left it last. when i read henry jamess novel the portrait of a lady for the first time, just after college, i felt the full pathos of isabel archers entrapment by the reptilian gilbert osmond. (the briefest possible summary of the novel: isabel, a young american of independent spirit, inherits a fortune thanks to the maneuvering of her sickly, angelic cousin ralph touchett, who hopes it might encourage her individuality, but is seduced into a cruel and airless marriage by osmond, with the assistance of his quicksilver accomplice, madame merle.) reading it again recently, though, after an interval of fifteen years, it seemed a different bookvery funny, for starters, a trait one is liable to forget because of the novels melancholy arc. what was most genuinely astonishing, though, was that the portrait of a lady stirred less anger in me toward osmond than it did toward another domineering force in isabel archers life: henry james.

like james, whom he has cited as a serious influence, banville is most famous as a stylist. his best fictionthe book of evidence, ghostsis written with an angry, suffering lyricism, often so beautiful as to excuse him from plot. from the former of those two books:

this sunset, for instance, how lavishly it was laid on, the clouds, the light on the sea, that heartbreaking, blue-green distance, laid on, all of it, as if to console some lost suffering wayfarer. i have never really got used to being on this earth. sometimes i think our presence here is due to a cosmic blunder, that we were meant for another planet altogether, with other arrangements, and other laws, and other, grimmer skies. i try to imagine it, our true place, off on the far side of the galaxy, whirling and whirling. and the ones who were meant for here, are they out there, baffled and homesick, like us?

writing like this, which pushes us closer to the world while estranging us from it, has been banvilles signature gift.

mrs. osmond concerns the weeks that follow the two culminating events of the portrait of a ladythe death of ralph touchett and the revelation that madame merle is the true mother of osmonds daughter, pansy. banvilles isabel begins the novel by drawing an enormous amount of cash on her accounts in london; she then proceeds on her wending way back toward rome, with the determination that she will declare her freedom from her husband. upon her voyage, she encounters most of jamess significant characters, including her friends henrietta stackpole and ned rosier, as well as several of banvilles own invention.

at times, banville reads the portrait of a lady with perfect clarity. she felt within her all the shrinkings of a sinner, he writes of isabel, only she could not identify the sin. it is womanhood. and banvilles instinct to begin with the supreme implicit subject of jamess novelfeminism, avant la lettre is dead on. after all, what was it to be a woman in 1876, knowing that a single mistake might ruin your life? what half-chance recuperations could conceivably have been available to a mrs. osmond? those are the themes banville is pursuing, the right ones.

and yet his book is a terrible disappointmentlargely because of the terrible, overawing fact of henry james. for all the autocratic plottedness of the portrait of a lady, the main impression it leaves is still of its authors almost surreal brilliance. as the pages pass, it seems impossible that james can sustain the simultaneous intensity and fineness of his observations for another line, much less for another paragraph, much less another chapter. yet it goes on and on. there are hundreds of sentences in the book that would be the best in nearly every other novel. flipping wholly at random, i find an early suitor of isabels described, with throwaway beauty, as possessing a handsome, easy, important physiognomy, a phrase that might as well pronounce, in its four words: writers of this planet, here is how you use adjectives.

this inimitable writerly grace is banvilles undoing. it would be one thing if mrs. osmond merely suffered from stiff storytellingwhich it does, with isabel reminiscent of the redcrosse knight of the faerie queene, confronting various one-dimensional characters designed to illuminate her passage toward liberation. it would be another, still forgivable, if it were only that his characters were so direct that you blush on behalf of jamess own creations, whose code would have required them to remain several subtle removes from the forthrightness banville ascribes to them in mrs. osmond. i care nothing for your husbandand neither do you, so dont pretend, osmond says to his sister, with a bluntness typical to this book but impossibly distant from the sublime, stupid refinement of the manners in isabel archers world.

no: whats devastating is how gallantly banville tries and how comprehensively he fails to mimic jamess style. the problem is fundamental and entirely pervasive. james uses his long sentences to talk himself further into their beginnings, or sometimes out of them, into second and third and fourth layers of thought. but banville seems to mistake this for mere elongation; the grain of his thought and his prose are too coarse to make his attempt credible. take this: it was schadenfreude , which meant, as she knew all too well, the taking of pleasure in the misfortunes of others. trust the precise and finical teutons, she thought, to compress so broad a concept into a single handy term. or this: the densely moted air occluded the morning suns vigorous rays, and the traffic grinding its way around the square, like a malfunctioning carousel, seemed unnaturally clamorous. if it werent on the record that banville admires james so greatly, i would suspect his gruesome, circuitous mundanities of being satirical.

if youre separated from henry jamess prose by more than a few weeks, its very easy to begin repeating the old jokes about it. (h. g. wells said that james was like a hippopotamus trying to pick up a pea from a corner.) but to actually read his words, when you are a writer yourself, is to feel the shocking jolt of an ineradicable personal insufficiency. there probably arent thirty living writers who could have done it better, you think; then, immediately, thank god the other twenty-nine havent tried.