senate republican leaders have announced a plan to marry their tax-cut legislation with a sloppy effort to destroy obamacare. specifically, they will eliminate the mandate requiring americans to have health insurance, so that they can free up three hundred billion dollars to add some middle-class tax cuts to a bill focussed on the rich. this is the legislative and intellectual equivalent of a terrifying and offensive tweet from the head of state, and could have far more lasting impact.

the logic of combining the destruction of health insurance with a tax cut for the rich does make some desperate political sense. senate republicans needed to find more money. if the tax-cut bill increases the deficit by more than $1.5 trillion, it would trigger the so-called byrd rule, requiring a supermajority of votes in order to pass. that is the same as saying it would fail, since no democrats would ever vote for it. the reason that the republicans need more money is that most of the tax bills benefits go to the very richest . even the bills main boosters, including house speaker paul ryan and gary cohn, trumps chief economic adviser, have had to admit that they broke their promise that the middle class would benefit most. (cohn emphasized that giving the rich a large tax cut had not been the intention, even if it is the bills reality.) the pending giveaway to the rich has become broadly unpopular, according to polls from abc , reuters , and the ap . republicans, caught between the byrd rule and the middle class, had to find a way to give something to average americans while also lowering future government spending so that the math would add up.

the congressional budget office had, inadvertently, provided them with a perverse solution. last week, the c.b.o. released a report that showed that repealing the mandate requiring americans to have some form of health insurance would lead to millions fewer being insured. that would mean that the government wouldnt have to pay the subsidy for their insurance, and could save roughly three hundred billion over the next decade. if those savings were then used to give the middle class some form of targeted tax relief, then the republicans could have a big winner. they could cut taxes, win over wavering voters, and kill obamacare all at once. at least thats the hope. it almost certainly wont work.

the new republican proposal suffers from one major problem: it is terrible. the nation doesnt need a repeal of obamacare or a big tax cut for the rich. there is no solidly grounded theory that argues in favor of huge tax cuts for the wealthy during a period of solid economic growth, in which most benefits have already gone to the rich. this proposal, though, is a particularly awful way to give tax cuts or to eliminate obamacare.

the individual mandate is essential for the success of obamacare or, for that matter, any successful national insurance policy. when people can choose whether or not to be insured, those who are older or sicker tend to be the first to sign up. since they cost more money to care for, their premiums are higher, making insurance less attractive to the younger and healthier. this is no minor problem. if the individual mandate is repealed, it could quickly lead to the dreaded health-insurance death spiral, in which ever-rising rates scare off all but the sickest, making rates rise still higher. by repealing the individual mandate without replacing it with any alternative health-insurance scheme, this proposal would have a first-order effect of increasing the ranks of the uninsured by thirteen million people during the coming decade. some percentage of that group will, without a doubt, facing crippling health-care bills and economic collapse. the real trouble will come in the second-order effects, as obamacare collapses in many parts of the country, leading to many more uninsured. ultimately, much of the cost of paying for these uninsured americans will fall on the government and, therefore, on taxpayers.

the proposal is proposal too grand a word for what this is?will have a hard time passing the senate. senator susan collins, of maine, who is one of three crucial swing votes, has already signalled that shes unlikely to support it. one other defection would kill the idea. what other choice, though, does senate majority leader mitch mcconnell have (aside from actually pushing thoughtful bipartisan legislation)? he needs some kind of major legislation to pass through his chamber before next years elections. it would be good if that legislation had the words tax reform in it, and even better if it also had the phrase obamacare repeal attached.

sure, this idea is likely to fail. but so has everything else. republicans in congress are already all but destined to pay the price for failed legislation. why not take the tiny chance that this will pass, and even become law? the 2018 elections will come before the worst effects of this proposal hit americans. if this crazy idea works, it would help erase the embarrassing chaos of the last year. the worst effects of this proposal wont be felt until after the 2020 elections and, who knows, people might forget that it was the republicans who crafted this solution. desperate times call for idiotic measures.