on wednesday evening, thinkprogress reported that roy moore , the republican candidate for alabamas open senate seat, co-authored a 2011 textbook called law and government: an introductory study course. the books amazon page , which includes a single rating, of five stars, states that the book provides an understanding of todays legal, moral, and ethical issues of law and government. one of its subjects is the appropriate role of women in society. as thinkprogress notes, the book, which consists of lectures by several men, instructs students that women should not be permitted to run for elected office. if women do run for office, the course argues, people have a moral obligation not to vote for them. additionally, the book criticizes the womens-suffrage movement. another of its authors is doug phillips, a proponent of so-called biblical patriarchy who resigned from vision foruma now-defunct evangelical organization, which helped produce the textbookafter admitting to an affair with a girl who later filed a suit alleging that phillips began grooming her for sexual abuse when she was fifteen.

on thursday, a spokesperson for moore told the washingtonian that judge moore has never stated or believed that women are unqualified for public office. i spent much of yesterday speaking with republican women in alabama who either have worked or continue to work for conservative causes and candidates. i asked them how moores connection to the vision forum textbook could affect the support he receives in the december 12th election, which recent polls give him an edge to win over the democrat, doug jones. (jones had previously surged ahead in some polling, partly on the strength of female support, but his momentum seems to have ebbed.) most of the women answered on the record, despite the negative repercussions that doing so could have on their party standing. elizabeth beshears is a political-communications consultant based in birmingham. in alabama, we talk all the time about how, historically, the men run but the women are the ones who get them elected, beshears told me. as a woman who has worked hard to get republicans elected to office, at all levels in the state, its extremely worrying to me to know that somebody whos supposed to represent us at one of the highest levels in the country doesnt think im good enough to serve in any capacity in political leadership.

beshears went on, for folks under forty in particular, roy moore has been a source of embarrassmentnot a source of pridefor the majority of our lives. we dont want to reward that by putting him in the senate, where hell have an even larger stageor pulpit, as he probably imagines itto talk about his brand of christianity. its time that the republican party in alabama knows that were not going to stand for being told that they have to vote for a person just because they have an r beside their name. who would beshears vote for? i am prayerfully considering voting for doug jones.

another powerful female figure in the state party, who asked to remain unnamed, was more explicit. the textbooks anti-woman argument was, for her, one of the most damning stories about moore so far. does that mean our governor shouldnt be governor? she asked, referring to kay ivey. our supreme court chief justice shouldnt be supreme court chief justice, and our republican party state chairwoman shouldnt be chairwoman? (those positions are currently held by lyn stuart and terry lathan, respectively.) because, ill tell you, i wasnt gonna vote at all until this morning, she continued. i wasnt gonna vote for moore or jones. now im voting for doug jones. because if that guymooredoesnt think i need to be anywhere but the kitchen birthing babies, he can kiss my ass. she added, i cant say it publicly because itll ruin my career, and i dont know how to do anything other than politics in alabama. i would be without income tomorrow. i cant stand up and say anything. but if im not good enough to be in government, then im not good enough to vote for him, either.

collier tynes describes herself as a christian, pro-life conservative and lifelong republican. until earlier this year, tynes worked as the chief of staff to the former alabama first lady dianne bentley, who is now the ex-wife of the disgraced governor robert bentley. tynes played down the impact of the textbook. at this point, lifelong republicans are not surprised by judge moores association with a book that takes scripture out of context and preaches invalid beliefs, tynes told me. its the credible allegations of child molestation against judge moore that rightfully have pro-life christians staying home on election day or surrendering their votes to a republican write-in candidate. tynes declined to publicly state for whom she would be voting, though, as she has said elsewhere, it would not be moore.

then there are those female supporters of moore for whom the textbook revelation is, to quote alabamas state auditor jim zeigler, much ado about very little . debbie dooley, the co-founder of the atlanta tea party and a moore backer, argued, in an e-mail, that just because moore was one of the textbooks authors doesnt mean that he shares all the views within it. it is like being part of an event, but you dont necessarily agree with all the speakers, she wrote. she went on, i dont believe for a minute that he believes that way. he has too many strong women around him, including his wife kayla. he also had sarah palin campaign for him and has praised her. as thinkprogress reported, moore has never publicly endorsed a female candidate for office.

beshears told me that she fears that this latest revelation will have a marginal effect on the vote. people have made up their minds about voting for him or notbarring something just absolutely crazy coming out in the next week and a half, she said, adding, its sad to me to have to say that, in the context of moores reputation, this textbook thing isnt fatal. it would sink a lot of other people. but he has such a loyal base that i dont know what it would take to get them not to vote for him. tynes was slightly more optimistic but, nonetheless, sounded despairing about the situation. defending victims of childhood molestation and the importance of women in government should not be controversial. thus, the alabama republican partys continued support of roy moore has put lifelong republican voters in a horrible position.