to readers of breitbart news these days, karl rove is a familiar, sinister presence. the republican strategist who twice helped george w. bush win the presidency is now, according to breitbart, the voice of the hapless republican establishment, out of touch, and wrong in nearly every prognostication for the past ten years. in one article this summer, breitbarts washington political editor, matthew boyle, called rove president trumps arch-nemesis. invariably, the voluminous coverage of rove on the conservative web site, which is run by trumps former chief strategist stephen bannon, notes that the president himself has labelled rove such a dishonorable guy, a total incompetent jerk, and a proven loser. so when rove went to north carolina this fall to headline a fund-raiser for a republican congressman, breitbart quickly responded. the congressman, a back-bencher from charlotte named robert pittenger, was dubbed a tool of the karl rove-backed elites who had sold out his district. a story on the site announced that bannon was making the race a key front in what breitbart calls bannons war against establishment republicans. from here on, the article warned, bannon would be supporting pittengers opponent in the republican primary, a fiery minister named mark harris. i reached pittenger by phone the other day, and he professed bewilderment at the furor. when you look at the rankings, ive voted with trump ninety-six per cent of the time. im endorsed by the american conservative union, the national right to life, the n.r.a., and a host of other organizations, he told me. ive never met steve bannon, but it seems to be a game. theres all kinds of games up there in washington. as for rove, ive known him a long time, and i appreciated him coming, pittenger said. i have all sorts of people coming to help me. rove was more forthcoming when we met for a couple of hours last friday, at his office in austin, texas. this wasnt about robert pittenger, he said, it was about karl roveand steve bannon. this summer, rove had publicly celebrated trumps firing of bannon, cheering good riddance to steve bannon in his weekly column for the wall street journal and skewering bannons grandiose and destructive plans to meddle in party primaries. rove followed that up a few weeks ago with another scathing attack on bannon in the journal , lambasting his jihad against republican incumbents who support the partys congressional leadership and mocking his choice of candidates, including the convicted felon michael grimm for a new york house seat. that was on october 18th. the following day, breitbart published its piece attacking pittenger. in our meeting, rove pointed out that pittengers is the only house race that bannon appears to be targeting currently, along with a long list of senate races. why? rove asked. because i appeared at a fund-raiser for pittenger. the congressman is a loyal trumpista who just happens to have been a bush supporter in 2000, who became a personal friend of mine. and now hes the enemy. at least, hes the enemy according to bannon, the chief leninist, as rove called him, of his own self-styled trump revolution. for his part, bannon was travelling in japan and not available to respond to roves comments, though he has made clear in numerous interviews the low regard in which he holds rove and the president he served, having called bush the single most destructive president in u.s. history, and i include james buchanan in that. i dont know steve bannon, dont think ive ever met him, rove told me. but, for him, its all personal.

politics has always been karl roves personal obsession. in 1973, during the nixon era, he famously and divisively got himself elected the national chairman of the college republicans after a hard-fought campaign which not incidentally pitted him against terry dolan, the friend of the future trump adviser roger stone, whose campaign was managed by the future trump campaign chief paul manafort. decades later, in a memo to trump asking for a role in his 2016 race, manafort would refer to rove as his blood enemy in politics, going all the way back to that college republicans contest. rove, of course, went on to become a successful texas political consultant, and, since he helped the then texas governor george w. bush win the presidency, in 2000, he has been a force to be reckoned with in the national republican party. throughout most of bushs tenure in washington, rove was by his side in the white house, feared and loathed by democrats and celebrated by republicans. he was known as bushs brain, as the title of a book about him put it; the presidents cynical, sophisticated envoy to the hard right and the architect who masterminded bushs two presidential elections with hardball tactics and shameless pandering to base prejudice where necessary. john dickerson, writing in slate, called him the bush white houses irreplaceable man, an adviser in the middle of every important west wing decision, and a party builder who dreamed of a republican revolution that would keep the gop in power for a generation. by the time the revolution sputtered and barack obama turned republicans out of the white house, in 2008, rove seemed destined for the quieter life of a party elder. he had returned to austin, texas, where he had met bush in the first place, and started writing the wall street journal column and appearing on fox news as a paid pundit. rove helped found american crossroads, a big-money pac to support republican candidates, after the supreme court opened up the floodgates to unlimited gifts from mega-donors, and he published both a memoir of his bush years and a historical account of the 1896 presidential campaign, a longtime labor of love he had talked about for years. and then along came trump, a bush basher of long standing who had been a democrat for most of his life. trumps ascendance was definitely not the republican revolution that rove had intended. their loathing was immediateand very much mutual. in may of 2016, once it was clear that trump had locked up the republican nomination with a primal scream of a campaign against party gatekeepers like rove, a mutual friend tried to make peace between them. steve wynn, the casino magnate and a big donor to roves political interests, brought rove and trump together for what rove told me was a three-and-a-half-hour meeting, just the three of them, at wynns manhattan home. it didnt go well, as far as rove was concerned, and he came away believing that trump was unaware of even basic political realities. rove said he walked trump through the battleground states only to have the candidate interrupt him repeatedly to insist he could win solidly democratic bastions such as california, new york, and oregon. politically, he had no idea what he was doing, rove told me. there may be no bigger sin in roves book than such political ignorance. even today, a year and a half after his conversation with trump, rove seemed amazed and infuriated at the bad politics being practiced by the president and his team. trump is bereft of any of the knowledge that people pick up from being involved in politics, rove told me at one point in our conversation in his cluttered office, a stones throw away from the texas state capitol building and next door to the fox news studio from which he does his regular tv hits. it was a friday afternoon in a dressed-down part of the world, but rove wore a bright yellow tie with elephants all over it. a year after trump won the white house, rove clearly was not yet ready to concede the trump takeover of the party that rove has spent his career building. democrats had just clobbered the republicans in two off-year gubernatorial races, in virginia and new jersey, and rove had gone on tv to affix blame squarely on the president himself. the voters, he said on the fox show hosted by his former bush white house colleague dana perino, were motivated by one thing: they didnt approve of president trump. when i mentioned that line to him, rove said the disaffection with trump wasnt just in those states voting last week. as i travel, people come up to me and say, oh, im so enthusiastic about trump, and then two seconds later its but i wish hed stop tweeting or i voted for him and i hoped he would do better but hes not.  in washington these days, republicans are robustly debating how to categorize trump: is he a one-off, an outsider who just happened to win a once-in-a-lifetime upset? or does trumps victory say something more about the party itself? is the renegade president a symptom, in other words, of a party that has moved on, with or without its leadership, from the old orthodoxies of its reagan-bush past? ive talked with several younger republicans who believe that is the real explanation for trump (our failure led to this demagogue, one prominent conservative told me), but rove believes that the party as he knows it will endure. trump is sui generis: nobody else soon will be able to pull off his act, rove told me, and even the populist fervor that trump rode to office has a very good chance of dissipating if answered by constructive policies. when i pressed rove on whether trump was changing the g.o.p., pulling its ideological moorings away from the free-trade internationalism that he and bush championed, he responded no, or, at least not yet. trump, he said, is neither an ideological figure nor a great communicator of a philosophical mind-set. hes got slogans, not a philosophy; impulses, not habits. to reinvent a party permanently, you need a consistent, well-informed, well-organized philosophy.