on a high parapet in the morningside heights neighborhood of manhattan, there is a grand monument to a nineteenth-century american statesman. cast in larger-than-life bronze, he stands, thin, bearded, and fierce-looking, wearing a waistcoat and a cape, a crumpled fedora in his right hand, gazing to the west. to either side of the statue are heroic black bas-reliefs; underneath it is a chiselled inscription:

carl schurz

defender of liberty

and a friend of

human rights

schurz is also the namesake of the park adjoining the official residence of the mayor of new york, on the east river, and of several other monuments across the country, but many people wont know who he was. (famous people dont always stay famous.) schurz was americas leading ethnic politician, back when german-americans were a substantial and self-conscious group, and he was a crusading liberal reformer. born in prussia in 1829, schurz, a youthful revolutionary, was forced to leave germany and arrived in the united states in 1852. within a few years, he had become a passionate abolitionist and a leader of the new republican party. in nineteenth-century america, career paths were not as established as they are now. schurz, on the basis of strength of will more than expertise, went on to serve as a general in the union army, a prominent journalist, what wed now call an activist, and a politician.

the end of the civil war hardly settled the question of african-american rights in the south. in 1865, president andrew johnson sent schurz there on an inspection tour. schurz reported back that the insurrection had by no means ended: murder, assault with intent to kill, theft and robbery are matters of every day occurrence, he wrote from vicksburg, mississippi, and much of this came from the not-realizing on the part of the southern people that the negro is a free man. therefore, it is absolutely indispensable that the country be garrisoned with troops as thickly as possible. later that year, he warned, presciently, it is of the highest importance that the people lately in rebellion be not permitted to build up another peculiar institution whose spirit is in conflict with the fundamental principles of our political system.

schurz was right that only the presence of federal troops could effectively guarantee the safety and basic rights of black people in the south, even after these rights were built into the constitution through the adoption of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments. but, within just a few years, he had changed his mind. in 1868, schurz was elected to the united states senate from missouri, a border state where his views on racial matters were not popular. in 1872, he joined the breakaway liberal republican party, which opposed president ulysses grants enforcement of the policy that schurz had helped to create. in january, 1875, he made an influential speech on the floor of the senate calling for the withdrawal of troops and the restoration of self-government in the south. i declare i shall hail the day as a most auspicious one for the colored race in the south  when they begin to see the identity of their own true interests with the interests of the white people among whom they have to live, he said.

schurzs speech was prompted by an incident in which federal troops marched onto the floor of the louisiana legislature to restore republican members to their seats, after the democrats stole an election. the white-liberal establishment of the day was horrified by the spectacle of armed soldiers entering a venue of civil government; mass meetings were held at the cooper union, in new york, and faneuil hall, in boston, to protest the action. liberals like schurz had lost patience with reconstruction, partly because the black republican party in the south gave off a feeling of machine politics, which they found abhorrent even in the north, where the machines were irish and democratic. essentially all of grants cabinetand, for that matter, such liberal publications as the nation , the atlantic , harpers , and the times agreed that the time had come to end reconstruction.

in return for the republicans agreeing to end reconstruction, the democrats agreed to concede the close and contested presidential election of 1876. the new president produced by this compromise, rutherford b. hayes, rewarded schurz by appointing him secretary of the interior. troops were removed from the south, and from there it was a direct line to the creation of the jim crow system (the end of whose nearly century-long reign required, among other things, the restored presence of federal troops in the south, beginning at central high school in little rock, arkansas, in 1957).

schurz died a hero in 1906; plans to build an elaborate memorial to him in morningside heights began immediately. the dedication ceremony was in the spring of 1913. it didnt occur to the people who could get monuments built back then that schurzs change of heart about reconstruction might have been been mistaken. ideas about the biologically determined ordering of the races were almost universal among the gentry of the day, and those who held them thought of themselves as benign in their intentions. one of the bas-reliefs flanking the statue of schurz shows a roman-style soldier breaking chains that bind a barely clad black couple. the image was clearly intended to reinforce the human-rights theme of the monument, but in the twenty-first century its inescapably offensive.

we are in a moment of binary attitudes toward people who rise to the level of being enshrined in statuary; either they are paragons or they have to go. because schurz is now obscure, and because he doesnt fit into an easy-access category of disapprovalhe was a union general, not a confederate generalhe makes for a tough call, if youre accustomed to thinking about monuments as denoting simple heroism. schurz played a meaningful part in getting slavery abolished, and, later, he played a meaningful part in taking civil rights and voting rights away from african-americans. by our lights today, hes neither a good guy nor a bad guy, and elements of the monument that seemed progressive when it was dedicated dont seem progressive today.

in the case of the monuments to confederate generals in the south, the strong argument for their removal is less about the generals themselves than about the intention behind the memorials, which was to send the message that jim crow was a noble cause. they were built as monuments to a system, and the evils of the system make removing them a good idea. in the case of the monument to schurz in morningside heights, the intention was most likely to celebrate his association with the replacement of patronage hiring with the civil service. thats neither especially stirring nor especially problematic today. so one is left to evaluate schurzs statue in terms of schurz himself.

the problem is that almost no long-ago white americans views on race pass muster today. the same year that schurz made his speech in the senate opposing reconstruction, the unions general william tecumseh shermanwho is enshrined in an especially grand gilded equestrian statue in grand army plaza, at central park southwrote in his memoirs, about the period following the civil war, the negro question was beginning to loom up among the political eventualities of the day, and many foresaw that not only would the slaves secure their freedom, but that they would also have votes. sherman reassured his readers that he then did not suppose that the former slaves would be suddenly, without preparation, manufactured into voters, equal to all others, politically and socially. but he also proposed the never-enacted forty-acres-and-a-mule policy for former slaves.

there is an element of idol worship in the impulse to erect monuments to people; nobody has ever actually been as perfect as the creation of a memorial implies. and taking down monuments, something that has been going on all over the world for millennia, is, literally, iconoclasm: people destroy or deface old idols, often with the intention of creating new ones. it would be good to develop a category of people whom we celebrate while also viewing them as they are, or werenamely, as complicated and imperfectand to find ways to amend (rather than topple) monuments to people like schurz. there must be some way to indicate that schurzs monument expresses contemporary sentiments that now seem badly out of dateto use it as an instructive artifact of the mentality of the early twentieth century. our own mentality will surely seem just as dated in a hundred years, in ways that we cannot anticipate today.