roger clark and robert patton, wearing bikers for trump vests, leaned against the six-thousand-square-foot barn where moore and bannon would soon speak, watching the media gather. youve got the liberal establishment trying to shut down a man whos been in politics all this time and never had these allegations come up, clark said. then all of a sudden youre getting robocalls all over the state of alabama asking women to come forward. last month, some residents of the state received recorded messages from a  bernie bernstein , supposedly a reporter at the washington post , offering money in exchange for damaging remarks about moore. (there is no such reporter.) clark, whos in his fifties, said that he had never voted until donald trump ran for president. never really liked a candidate, he said. the people are taking the country back, he added, whether anybody likes it or not.

walking behind covington were two retired women, dorothy basinger and suzanne monica, members of the baldwin county republican party whod also come to volunteer. im against so many things that the dems stand for, basinger, who spent her career at general motors, said, explaining her support for moore. abortion. taxes, of course. illegal immigration. im with trump all the way. whatever he likes, i like. she added, we feel like judge moore has been tried and convicted by harvard blondes in the media already. we think thats terrible. monica nodded. we werent happy with the republican national committee backing off moore, she said. they left him out to dry when jones started putting out those unfair ads . the jeff sessions ad. the shelby ad. the ivanka trump ad, which hurt him probably the worst. the recent iron bowl and s.e.c. championship games, huge tv events in alabama, were dominated by jones, since, at the time, the r.n.c. had withdrawn its funds from the race. (it has since restored its support of moore.)

as for the allegations against moore, which some prominent republicans have publicly acknowledged to be credible, covington said, mitch mcconnell and a bunch of other deep-state rino s come out and say, roy moore is not fit to be in the united states senate. shit, about half of them arent fit to be up there!

mark covington, a retired resident of gulf shores, nearby, arrived at the rally early. a self-described political junkie, covington had come to volunteer. he explained to me why hed moved to the area, from georgia, four years ago. i thought, well, let me check fairhope. eight per cent minorities. then i thought, what about gulf shores? one and a half per cent. i said, hmm, getting better all the time. i checked orange beach: one half per cent! i thought, well, ill just take gulf shores, what the hell. so thats why i moved down here. i wanted to be somewhere with mostly white folks. he added, i dont aspire to be in the ku klux klan or anything. im not a white separatist or whatever you call it. i just try to have some values i stick to. im conservative. i watch fox news.

last night, at oak hollow farm, a former cotton plantation in fairhope, on alabamas mobile bay, roy moore and steve bannon spoke to a few hundred of their most ardent followers . the event was free. the weather, at first, was fine. the election to fill jeff sessionss former senate seat, between the republican moore and the democrat doug jones, was one week away. phil robertson, a duck dynasty star, appeared here in september, during the primary, to back moore at his last bannon-headlined rally. at the time, moore had yet to beat the establishment republican luther strange , or face the allegations of nine women who say that moore molested or assaulted them when they were teen-agers and moore, now seventy, was in his thirties.

around dusk, some sixty local women, dressed in burgundy capes and bonnets, to resemble breeders from margaret atwood s dystopian novel the handmaids tale, which was recently adapted for television, appeared. several had the names of moores accusers written on pieces of tape placed across their mouths. a few men were with them, holding anti-moore signs. someone has to draw a line in the sand, and were doing that, the groups leader, michele walker harmon, an ordained universalist minister who lives in nearby elberta, told me. they were denied entry to the venue, on the grounds that it was private property, and were escorted by sheriffs deputies to a public strip of cement where they told arriving attendees to enjoy their nazi rally. a man in a large truck swerved toward the group at one point, yelling.

an african-american man stood alone on the grass outside the barn. he introduced himself as romeo ryan. brother moore, ive known him for twenty-five years now, he said. i rap, he added. im a positive rapper: rappin romeo.  he met moore decades ago, outside a news station in birmingham. the judge came walking up. a lady started screaming and hollering at him. i watched to see how hed react. it was like he was talking to his own mother, trying to calm her down. ryan was impressed. from that day on, ive been his family, i guess you could say. every time he runs for something, i put a big old sign up in the yard, and on my r.v.

ryan acknowledged being one of only a few african-americans at the rally. a lot of them support doug jones up in birmingham, ryan said. you know what he did by prosecuting that old man who used to be in the klan? that made a lot of people happy. personally, i always wondered what took him so long. he added, i think he was just laying a stone to step on. something to brag about. ryan said that moore spoke in terms that he respected. when i listen to him talk, its like hearing dr. king talk. or abraham lincoln talk. he talks that same kind of language: about the constitution, rights, stuff like that.

reverend william owens, the founder and president of the coalition of african-american pastors , took the stage inside, where a few hundred were gathered. i marched in the civil-rights movement with dr. king, he announced, to tepid applause. those were some dark days. today, sixty years later, i march for christian rights. the applause grew. a young blond woman followed, noting the endorsement moore had received from a doggone fine president and adding, why would you listen to the party of abortion on demand? later, the crowd stood out of respect for colonel glenn frazier, a ninety-four-year-old survivor of the bataan death march and a moore supporter, sitting in the audience. frazier had told me, earlier in the evening, im a christian, and judge moore is absolutely the only thing that weve got right now. im voting for america.

why would you listen to the party of abortion on demand? one speaker asked. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker steve bannon, the former trump adviser, railed against republicans in washington. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker

bannon arrived late, and damp, walking in from a sudden downpour to roaring approval. the former trump adviser spoke for half an hour, telling the crowd that the days of just taking it silently are over. he insisted that the attacks on moore were threats to the people gathered. if they can destroy roy moore, they can destroy you. a protester began yelling at one point. can the cnn producer keep it down in the back, bannon said, eliciting laughter. he took a few swipes at jones and democrats but spent more of his time extolling economic nationalism and berating establishment republicans, including flake (jeff flake, that is, the arizona senator), willard (the former presidential candidate mitt romney), and mitch (as in mcconnell). bannon seemed to take special pleasure in going after romney, who has said that roy moore in the u.s. senate would be a stain on the gop and on the nation.

when bannon ceded the stage to moore, the judge thanked dr. steve bannon, perhaps confusing him with dr. sebastian gorka, who has introduced moore at previous rallies . (bannon does not have a doctorate or practice medicine.) a few minutes into his speech, a young protester whod made it inside the barn raised a #nomoore sign and began to shout. he was briskly pushed outside by moore supporters, at least one of whom, an elderly man, punched him in the back of the head and broke his glasses. (the man later bragged to me that hed broke them right off his head.) moore portrayed himself as a protector of the innocent and the unborn. he did not directly address the accusations that he molested and assaulted teen-age girls. he quoted a great deal of scripture and compared the senates establishment figures to christopher columbus. he didnt know where he was going, and when he left and went back home, he couldnt say where hed been, moore said. but he spent all the money.

13 roy moore for senate buttons. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker 13 roy moore. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker 13 roy moore speaks at oak hollow farm. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker 13 trey yingst, the white house correspondent for one america news network. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker 13 the entrance to the grounds of oak hollow farm. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker 12 roy moore for senate buttons. photograph by william mebane for the new yorker

as the crowd dispersed and sweet home alabama played, a young man stood by himself outside. the rain had stopped. were in the dragons den, he said. he told me that his name was chad harris, and that his family has lived in the area for generations. you see what steve bannon said? hes so full of shit, harris said. he knows how to place the labels where they need to be placed. appeal to the emotions. he called moore a fucking coward who wouldnt address the allegations against him or debate jones on the issues. just scream abortion 24/7, thats all that matters. roy moore is the poster child of every stereotypical assumption that people make about alabama. he added, i like coming to these things to just be surrounded by it. this is american politics. this is what happens. im not a fucking snowflake. if you want a battle, bring it.