on wednesday, donald trump insisted that his declaration that the united states recognizes jerusalem as israels capital was nothing more or less than the recognition of reality, given that israel has made west jerusalem the seat of its government since 1949. downplaying warnings that the move might provoke widespread protests from palestinians, trump promised that the specific boundaries of israeli sovereignty in jerusalem are subject to final status negotiations between the parties. hedged with these qualifications, the declaration is merely symbolic, much like george w. bushs letter to ariel sharon in april, 2004, which asserted how unrealistic it was to expect from israel a full return to the 1967 borders. (those borders were precisely what the bush administration defaulted to when, with sharon gone, negotiations became serious in 2008.)

but symbols matter, especially when it comes to a city notorious for them. on thursday, thousands of demonstrators rallied in the west bank cities of hebron and al-bireh, chanting, jerusalem is the capital of the state of palestine. protests erupted in gaza, as well, and the leader of hamas, ismail haniyeh, called for a new intifada, or uprising, by palestinians in response to trumps announcement. by nightfall, at least thirty-one people had been wounded by israeli gunfire, and the times reported that the israeli military was dispatching additional battalions to the west bank and that the palestinian response appeared to be teetering between a limited wave of protests and a full-blown explosion of violence, as schools were closed, stores were shuttered and the public largely observed a general strike. multiple palestinian factions called for a day of rage to coincide with friday prayers.

for most palestinians, trumps declaration seemed like a symbol of old imperial fiat, an intention by the worlds superpower to hand the whole of jerusalem to the jewish peoplea kind of balfour declaration for the city. taken this way, as robin wright wrote , trumps action enraged muslims throughout the regionespecially in jordan, whose king abdullah has been most vocal in protest. jerusalem always seems like the ground near a volcano; you never know when the great eruptions come, but you can almost feel the pressure building under your feet.

trumps announcement can also be seen as a symbol of favoritism from the purported mediator, a coat of many colors to provide cover to benjamin netanyahu. israels prime minister is besieged by investigations, rising opposition forces, and international isolation. trump is tossing netanyahuand himselfa win, something to sell to likuds nationalist, religiously inclined political base, about which trump knows a thing or two; something trump can pass off as bipartisan respect for zionist history. trump has given mahmoud abbas no corresponding gift, though the latter is far more vulnerable. at least since abbas assumed the presidency of the palestinian authority, in 2004, he has staked his reputation on the idea that nonviolent diplomacy and state-building can bring change, while hamas made gains mocking him for trying. trump might have made a corresponding declaration in palestines favor, say, that america is joining with other members of the united nations general assembly in supporting resolution 67/19, adopted in 2012, upgrading palestine to non-member observer state status. he might have pressured the israeli government to ease the residency requirements for palestinian-american entrepreneurial talent in west bank cities. he has not been this creative.

abbas did everything that the americans asked of him, security cordination, state-building, reconciliation to settlement blocs, and is now looking very weak, bassim khoury, the c.e.o. of pharmacare plc, the palestinian generic-drug manufacturer, and a former minister of economics of the palestinian authority, told me. i am monitoring the attitudes on whatsapp strings, and sentiment is for greater militancy. in syria, lebanon, and yemen, americas proxies have apparently been defeated. people are joking that trump talks and talks but delivers americans only christmas and jerusalem.

the big change, khoury said, is that arabs in jerusalem are feeling the power of mobilization since they took to the streets to prevent israel from installing cameras at the aqsa mosque. i was there myself, four times, khoury said. more and more, he told me, you hear calls for new elections, or for abbas to resign. khoury is no supporter of hamas, but he, too, recognizes realities on the ground. nobody watches al jazeera anymore; everybody i know is watching al mayadeen tv from hezbollahs lebanon. the anger must eventually come out.

the point is that, for palestinians, the status quo is not a neutral thing; it works very much in israels favor, given the netanyahu governments continuing settlement-building, and its efforts to obliterate the line between the arab east and the jewish west of jerusalem. trumps insistence that his declaration is realism, implying that it does nothing to disrupt the status quo, is part of the problem.

the declaration was not an effort to reassure israelis that america stands with them as they face the hard compromises any deal will entail. in the nineteen-seventies, one could make the caseas president anwar sadat didthat a psychological barrier in israel was holding back the peace process. israels leadership, it was assumed, was inclined to some kind of territorial compromise, if not with the p.l.o. then with jordan, but could not be persuaded to relinquish any kind of strategic depth unless the israeli public as a whole could be reassured that egypt, or america, or both, recognized israels red lines, including its capital in jerusalem. in that context, sadats 1977 visit to jerusalemin effect, recognizing the western city as israels capitalwas electrifying.

this is hardly the situation today, however. the israeli government is stacked with ministers and coalition partners who regard the entire ancient land of israel as their divine patrimony. the obama administration made multiple efforts selling israel the most advanced fighters, funding anti-missile batteries, and signing a ten-year foreign-aid memorandumto reassure the israeli public of americas concern for israels security. but the version of israel that netanyahu is trying to consolidate today does not need reassurance. it takes what it wants. israel katz, the transportation minister, spoke for the government when he insisted in an israeli television interview that trumps announcement implies that jerusalem is to be united under the sovereignty of the jewish peoplea tribute to its ancient founding. recognizing israels exclusive rule as a fait accompli is the only way of to prove one accepts israel as a jewish state, he said. it is this version of israel that, symbolically, trump has blessed.

yet it is unclear how the palestinians will respond. ammar aker, the c.e.o. of paltel, a telecommunications firm that is the largest private-sector company in the palestinian authority, said the scale of the reaction to trumps announcement was worrying. watching the reaction on the ground today and the violence that broke out in the west bank is not promising, he wrote in an e-mail. i do not want my teenage son to be dragged into any activity, not because i do not want him to do so, but only because i am afraid that he will be hurt, like many other kids, by the israeli soldiers. i am sure every parent now is worried about his/her kids. obviously, trump is relaxed and very happy to create such a mess.

khoury told me that the war in syria, which had caused palestinians to fear chaos and the empowerment of militant groups, acted as a check on mass street protests. but, now that the assad regime has won a clear victory in syria, the mood among palestinians has changed. the days ahead, particularly friday, will show whether a repeat of the last intifada, which stretched from 2000 to 2005 and killed thousands, is what the city is risking. two years ago, khoury told me, i would not have expected violence, given the revulsion people felt, looking across the border to syria and chaos. but things have changed. the vast majority of people dont feel they have as much to lose as the people who run the businesses. i would not have predicted violence in 2000 either.