on the morning of october 5th, president trump was on one of his twitter rants from the white house, denying as fake news an nbc report that his secretary of state, rex tillerson , had called him a moron and threatened to resign. elsewhere in washington, the drama over whether tillerson was actually on his way out threatened to overwhelm other news stories for a second straight day. but, when i arrived at the townhouse of stanley greenberg, the veteran democratic strategist, on capitol hill, later that morning, it was not the distractions of the trump white house that had him worked up. greenberg was still fuming about hillary clinton. clinton was guilty of malpractice in how she conducted her 2016 presidential campaign, greenberg told me. even worse, he said, democrats were repeating the same political mistakes a year later. look at virginia right now, greenberg said, as soon as we sat down in his second-floor office. we have a candidateralph northam, the democratic gubernatorial nomineerunning as hillary clinton. he is running on the same kind of issues, and has the same kind of view of the world. its the republicans who talk about the economy, not the democrats. this was the approach that doomed clinton against trump. the electorate was angry in 2016 and remains angry now, greenberg said, and northam, a norfolk doctor, didnt get it. neither did clinton and the team of obama veterans who staffed her brooklyn headquarters. if you live in the metro areas with the lites, you dont wake up angry about whats happening in peoples lives, greenberg said. his rant was notable for a variety of reasons, not least because greenberg was the pollster who helped bill clinton win the white house in 1992, and he has been a participant in every democratic nominees presidential campaign since, including hillary clintons. his criticism illuminates an urgent question for the democratic party, not just in next weeks governors race in virginia but in the midterm elections of 2018 and beyond. could trump, as deeply polarizing and unpopular as he is, even be relected? greenberg and other prominent democrats still furious about last years clinton campaign think its entirely possible, unless the party figures out, and fast, a way to tackle the problem that sealed clintons fate in 2016: how to appeal to the disaffected white working-class voters who provided trumps unlikely win a year ago. that debate, greenberg told me, which would have been pushed off had she won, is immediate.

for months, greenberg has been stewing over how clinton conducted her campaign, and he finally unloaded, in the american prospect , a small-circulation progressive journal founded back on the eve of bill clintons presidency. greenbergs critical assessment in the form of a book review of  shattered , the best-selling insider account of the clinton campaign, published earlier this yearcame out in september and drew relatively little notice. but here was bill clintons pollster accusing hillary clintons campaign of strategic errors, mismanagement, and failure to heed the advice of him and others to appeal to the partys traditional working-class voters in the midwest. compounding the errors, clintons team conducted no state polls in the final three weeks of the campaign, relying instead on flawed data analytics to predict turnout and the vote. as a result, it didnt even know that final disaster loomed. malpractice and arrogance contributed mightily to the election of donald trump, greenberg concluded. greenberg disclosed in the piece that he was speaking as more than an outside critic. he had served as invited noodge throughout the 2016 campaign, greenberg revealed, secretly critiquing clintons speeches for months at her request, pushing for more attention to be paid to the economic struggles of the white working class, and advising her campaign chairman, john podesta. in our interview, greenberg elaborated, saying podesta had sought his counsel after it became clear that podesta was failing to sway clintons campaign manager, robby mooka young, data-driven veteran of terry mcauliffes winning gubernatorial run in virginiawhose strategy was to focus on turning out loyal obama voters rather than persuading wavering rust belt voters. it came out of his needing to win the argument internally, greenberg told me. both podesta and greenberg had worked for the bill clinton white house, where podesta served as chief of staff, and had been allies ever since. in the weeks after greenberg published his critique, i spoke with several other veterans of the bill clinton years who shared his appraisal of hillarys campaignand said that their advice had also been ignored. they viewed people like me and bill clinton as yesteryear, one, who ran his campaign in a key midwestern state and played a public role in hillary clintons campaign there as well, said. they thought the world has changed, politics has changed. but their analytics were flawed. they were treating this like a third term for obama, and it was a big mistake. the internal critics, they told me, had also included the former president, but he was, as greenberg put it when we talked, frozen out. this was, i realized, one of the hidden stories of the 2016 election. a former top adviser to the clinton campaign said that greenbergs gripes were a misplaced diagnosis for why we lost and noted that bill clinton had been a vigorous participant in the campaigns strategic discussions. hillary clinton herself alluded to greenbergs critique, though not the campaigns internal debates over it, in her recent memoir , dismissing as baloney greenbergs argument that she went silent on the economy and change in the key final days before the election. but, even if the fight is in part an exercise in after-the-fact finger-pointing, the campaigns internal struggles over how to talk to the trump base in the formerly democratic states of middle america are just as relevant, polarizing, and unresolved today as they were a year ago. should democrats bet their future on attacking trump and pledge, as the california billionaire donor tom steyer now wants them to do, to pursue trumps impeachment, at all costs, if they win back the house next year? should they give up on the white voters who went for trump in 2016 even though many had been reliably democratic in the past? was clintons defeated primary challenger, bernie sanders , right to try to pull the party to the left? without a resolution to these questions, the next democratic nominee may well end up caught in the same trap in which hillary clinton found herself, stuck defending the legacy of the two-term obama presidency, even as the economic dislocations of the obama era fuelled the rise of populism on both left and right.