mr. dowd argued in a statement to the news website axios that mr. trump cannot obstruct justice because he is the chief law enforcement officer under the constitution, and thus has every right to express his view of any case.

a white house spokesman traveling with the president on monday would not answer questions about the presidents tweets. mr. trump has denied that he tried to impede the f.b.i. investigation into mr. flynn, portraying mr. comey, who wrote contemporaneous memos about his talks with mr. trump before the president fired him, as a liar.

the furor over the presidents tweets highlighted the complexity of the obstruction accusations. both the facts of what happened and the law that should be applied to those facts remain in dispute, even as the actions under scrutiny stretch in different directions, from mr. flynns misconduct to the fate of the far broader russian interference investigation.

samuel w. buell, a duke university law professor and former federal prosecutor, said that the argument by mr. trumps defenders went too far because it would place any president above the law even if he or she exercises a presidential power for illegitimate purposes. while congress can impeach presidents for conduct beyond violations of ordinary law, he said, analyzing the obstruction statutes would be an obvious starting point.

if they want to argue factually that trump fired comey because he thought he was a bad f.b.i. director and that is all it was, then that is not obstruction because hes exercising the presidential power properly, mr. buell said. but if he pressures comey and asks him to drop the flynn investigation in order to protect the president and his most senior advisers, that is an improper exercise of presidential authority.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the presidents renewed drumbeat against the investigation came after the revelation on friday that mr. flynn had accepted a plea deal and agreed to cooperate with mr. muellers investigation.

i feel badly for general flynn, mr. trump said on monday as he left the white house for an event in utah. i feel very badly. hes led a very strong life, and i feel very badly.

advertisement continue reading the main story

he added: hillary clinton lied many times to the f.b.i. nothing happened to her. flynn lied and they destroyed his life.

the presidents comments about the f.b.i. angered agents and other staff who have been caught in a political maelstrom since the president dismissed mr. comey. the f.b.i. had hoped that after firing mr. comey, the president would stop targeting the bureau.

mr. trump compared mr. flynns case to the federal investigation into hillary clintons handling of classified information. after being interviewed by the f.b.i., she was not charged.

mr. wray, who has run the f.b.i. for about four months, told his employees to ignore any criticism and to continue to uphold the constitution.

we find ourselves under the microscope each and every day  and rightfully so. we do hard work for a living, he said, adding that the f.b.i. should continue to keep focused on our critical mission.

the email concluded with one of his favorite maxims: keep calm and tackle hard.

an f.b.i. spokesman declined to comment.

the presidents longstanding claim that no connections exist between his associates and russia also suffered a blow on monday evening when prosecutors revealed in court documents that his former campaign chairman, paul manafort, had been in contact with a longtime russian colleague believed to have ties to russian intelligence.

a person close to mr. manafort identified the associate as konstantin v. kilimnik, who worked for years as mr. manaforts close aide in ukraine and communicated with him throughout the 2016 presidential campaign.

the two drafted an op-ed article last week about mr. manaforts work for russian-aligned interests in ukraine, according to court papers filed by mr. muellers prosecutors in arguing for tougher bail restrictions for mr. manafort. he has pleaded not guilty to charges of money laundering and lobbying violations related to his work for viktor f. yanukovych, the former ukrainian president.

advertisement continue reading the main story

mr. kilimnik was born in ukraine when it was a part of the soviet union and served briefly in the russian army as a linguist, later telling associates that he had a background in russian intelligence. but as scrutiny of his work with mr. manafort mounted this year, mr. kilimnik denied any such association. and an investigation by ukrainian prosecutors into mr. kilimniks possible ties to russian spy agencies was closed last year without charges.