if senators on the foreign relations committee find that ms. mcfarland was evasive in her testimony, it could complicate her nomination to become ambassador to singapore. repeated attempts to reach ms. mcfarland, who left her post as deputy national security adviser in may, were unsuccessful.

in his written questions to ms. mcfarland, submitted as part of her confirmation process, mr. booker wrote that mr. flynn had been warned by another transition official that his contacts with the russian ambassador would most likely be intercepted by american intelligence agencies. mr. booker also mentioned mr. flynns 2015 trip to moscow, where he attended a dinner hosted by a kremlin-backed news network and was seated at the head table next to president vladimir v. putin of russia.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

mr. booker asked, did you ever discuss any of general flynns contacts with russian ambassador sergey kislyak directly with general flynn?

in a statement on monday, mr. booker said that he was concerned that ms. mcfarland might have given false testimony in her answers.

if this is the case, this is an alarming development, and another example of a pattern of deception on the part of trumps closest associates regarding their connections and communications to russian government officials, he said.

court documents released on friday, along with mr. flynns guilty plea, indicate that senior members of mr. trumps transition team were well aware of his discussions with the russian ambassador about the obama administrations sanctions. mr. flynn talked to mr. kislyak by phone on dec. 29, the day the sanctions took effect, and several days later.

in her email to another transition official hours before the first phone call, ms. mcfarland described president barack obamas decision to expel 35 russian diplomats as a last-minute attempt to discredit mr. trumps victory, box him in diplomatically and provoke him into a potentially politically damaging statement in russias defense.

advertisement continue reading the main story

general flynn is talking to the russian ambassador this evening, she wrote.

she also wrote: if there is a tit-for-tat escalation, trump will have difficulty improving relations with russia which has just thrown u.s.a. election to him. a white house lawyer said on friday that ms. mcfarland did not mean russia had tipped the election, only that democrats were portraying it that way.

court documents state that mr. flynn discussed what he should tell mr. kislyak with another transition official beforehand and briefed that person afterward. the court documents do not identify that official, who was with other senior members of the transition team at mr. trumps mar-a-lago resort in palm beach, fla. white house officials said on friday that they believed that the official was ms. mcfarland, but that information has not been confirmed.

during their follow-up call, mr. kislyak informed mr. flynn that russia would not retaliate immediately for the sanctions  a surprise to many foreign policy experts. mr. flynn then briefed senior transition team members about his discussions with mr. kislyak, the records show.

ms. mcfarland worked so closely with mr. flynn on the transition team that her colleagues sometimes referred to her as his brain.