ms. brown was among the first african-american politicians elected to washington from florida and burnished a reputation in state and national politics as a civil rights champion and as an advocate for the less fortunate. because of that legacy, the charity, one door for education, may have seemed to donors as an extension of her passion.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

ms. brown, along with two other people, collected more than $833,000 in charitable donations, telling benefactors that their money would help students pay for college and allow schools to receive computers. but one door for education did nothing of the sort.

instead, the donations were funneled into ms. browns personal bank accounts and toward extravagant items. about $330,000 of the charitys donations paid for events that included a florida golf tournament, professional football games and a luxury stadium box for a beyonc concert.

ms. brown leveraged the authority of her office and the relationships she had cultivated to illegal purpose, judge corrigan said. she cast aside the very laws that she helped to enact. the rules, she decided, did not apply.

the one door for education charity was run by ms. brown, who personally solicited many of the donations; her chief of staff, elias simmons, known as ronnie; and the organizations president, carla wiley. ms. wiley started the charity in virginia in 2011 but raised very little before she recruited mr. simmons to help. he brought in ms. brown to raise money.

while one door for education may have begun as an honest charity, it turned into a slush fund for all three, prosecutors said. mr. simmons withdrew $93,536 in cash from a.t.m.s and gave some of the money to ms. brown and kept the rest for himself, they said. ms. wiley also pocketed $182,730, prosecutors said.

while ms. brown pleaded not guilty and went to trial, both mr. simmons and ms. wiley pleaded guilty and testified against the former representative. the judge also sentenced them on monday, with mr. simmons receiving four years in prison and ms. wiley 21 months.

at the hearing, judge corrigan noted that ms. brown had earned the respect and admiration of many people in her district during her time in congress and the decade before that in the florida house of representatives. but the judge criticized her for showing no contrition for the crimes.

advertisement continue reading the main story

she cannot be accorded the same sentencing consideration as someone who accepts responsibility for her wrongful action, expresses remorse and promises to make amends, judge corrigan said.