mr. kilimnik was born in ukraine when it was still a part of the soviet union, and he served briefly in the russian army as a linguist, later telling associates that he had a background with russian intelligence. but this year, as scrutiny mounted of his work with mr. manafort in ukraine, mr. kilimnik steadfastly denied any association with russian intelligence. and an investigation by ukrainian prosecutors into mr. kilimniks possible links to russian spy agencies was closed late last year without charges.

mondays filing is notable because it marks the first official effort by mr. muellers team to connect mr. manafort to russian intelligence. it appears to tie the case against mr. manafort more closely to the focus of the special counsels probe: connections between russia and mr. trump and his associates, including whether they conspired to influence last years presidential election.

the united states intelligence community has concluded with high confidence that russian intelligence tried to interfere in the election on behalf of mr. trump, and at the instruction of president vladimir v. putin of russia.

mr. kilimnik has maintained residences in moscow and kiev, the capital of ukraine, and has traveled regularly between them during about a decade of working for mr. manafort on behalf of various russia-aligned oligarchs and political parties.

mr. manafort has told associates that he does not believe that mr. kilimnik has ties to russian intelligence. and he told the new york times in february that he had never knowingly spoken to russian intelligence officers, and i have never been involved with anything to do with the russian government or the putin administration or any other issues under investigation today.

but he added, its not like these people wear badges that say, im a russian intelligence officer.

mr. manafort and mr. kilimnik communicated regularly during the 2016 campaign, with mr. kilimnik traveling to the united states to meet at least twice. the pair exchanged cryptic emails last year in which they appeared to discuss how to use mr. manaforts role on the trump campaign to recoup unpaid bills from the russian oligarch oleg v. deripaska.

photo

in other emails, mr. manafort and mr. kilimnik appeared to discuss arranging a private briefing about the campaign for mr. deripaska, who is close to mr. putin. the briefing did not occur.

advertisement continue reading the main story

mr. kilimnik did not respond to a request for comment on monday about the effort to draft an op-ed article with mr. manafort.

the person close to mr. manafort said that the op-ed did not run, and blasted mr. muellers team for trying to limit mr. manaforts first amendment rights.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the court filing contends that the op-ed clearly was undertaken to influence the publics opinion of defendant manafort, or else there would be no reason to seek its publication. it says that the plan was for mr. manafort and his associate to ghostwrite the op-ed to appear under someone elses name, but it does not specify who, nor in what publication.

mr. muellers team indicated in the filing that it had a copy of the draft op-ed but did not want to make it public.

the special counsel flagged the op-ed effort last week for mr. manaforts lawyers, who assured the prosecutors that steps would be taken to make sure it was no longer going to be published, according to the monday filing.

mr. manaforts lawyer, kevin downing, declined to comment.