first, let me vent. the republican tax reform, now extremely likely to become law pending certain events next week in alabama, represents a remarkable missed opportunity for a party struggling through an identity crisis and a country reckoning with a social crisis.

after watching trumpian populism overwhelm the dikes of ideology during the last primary campaign, republican lawmakers could have learned something from the experience, and made the discontented working class voters who put donald trump in the white house the major beneficiaries of their tax reform.

instead, with trumps enthusiastic blessing, they devised a bill that was more solicitous of their donors than their voters, and that only modestly addressed the central socioeconomic challenge of our time  the nexus of wage stagnation, family breakdown and falling birthrates, which will eventually undo conservatism if conservatives cannot take it as seriously as they do the animal spirits of the investor class.

whats particularly frustrating is that it didnt have to be this way. the bills basic architecture is compatible with better policy, and there is no great mystery about how it could have been improved: all it needed was to shrink the business tax cuts somewhat and push the extra money directly into the paychecks of the working class. but when a version of that improvement was attempted, when senators marco rubio and mike lee tried to use a small portion of the bills corporate tax cut to pay for family tax cuts, the republican leadership decided to make the corporate cut nonnegotiable, the democrats decided it was better not to improve a bill that they oppose, and the senators themselves declined to be the bad guys of their caucus in a good cause and simply swallowed their defeat.

photo

so the result leaves a reforming conservatism as the neglected stepchild of the g.o.p., granted table scraps while the donors get the feast. it leaves republicans with ownership of a bill that is neither populist nor popular, and trump with ownership of an economic agenda that a reasonable voter should consider a betrayal of his promises. and it wastes an opportunity to turbocharge the recovery, because the bills corporate beneficiaries are already sitting on ample cash reserves and its the middle-class taxpayers who would have been more likely to spend extra money if they got it.

advertisement continue reading the main story

however, to repeat something ive said a few times in the trump era, when the venting is done its important to acknowledge that it could be worse. the bill is badly designed but it does some good things, including some things that could be done only in the teeth of democratic opposition. its flaws are significant but also manageable, and they arent going to tip america into the dystopian nightmare invoked by a certain kind of liberal twitter hysteric this past week. and as is often the case with flawed proposals, the failings offer useful signposts to the opposition: the partial defeat of reform conservatism leaves good ideas lying around to be picked up, and republican overreach creates opportunities for the democrats to pursue them.