in the 2016 election, president trump was most popular among demographic groups least likely to use social media. according to our calculations, mr. trump gained support relative to mitt romney among non-internet-using voters, but actually lost support among internet-using voters. an analysis by the media researchers keith hampton and eszter hargittai likewise finds that hillary clintons supporters were more likely to use twitter and reddit than mr. trumps supporters.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

and polarization was climbing steadily long before the rise of social media. in our study, we find it has been growing since the 1980s  long before the internet, let alone facebook or twitter, became popular choices for media consumption. we see no clear increase in this trend in the period when digital sources were introduced.

social media are likely to grow in importance over time, and none of these facts rule out its having important effects today. we should be concerned about the effects it has on its users, even if these users do not account for the bulk of overall polarization. young voters who use social media may share polarized views with older voters who do not, and inflammatory content on social media can be picked up and amplified by more mainstream outlets. nevertheless, we believe these and other data suggest social media are unlikely to be a main cause of rising polarization in america. we think it is important not to lose sight of other factors that may play a more important role.

the fox effect cable tv programming has become more ideologically polarized over time. researchers found that fox news had greater influence on elections than did msnbc, particularly in 2004 and 2008. if fox hadnt existed, change in the republican nominees popular vote share (percentge points): 0.5 in 2000 3.6 in 2004 6.3 in 2008 more conservative ideological lean of networks ideological lean fox cnn msnbc more liberal 2000 04 08 12 if msnbc matched cnn ideologically, change in the republican nominees popular vote share: 0.09 in 2008 +0.06 in 2000 1.2 in 2004 if fox hadnt existed, change in the republican nominees popular vote share: 0.5 percentage points in 2000 (popular vote winning margin: 0.5) 3.6 in 2004 (winning margin: 3.0) 6.3 in 2008 (winning margin: 7.3) more conservative ideological lean of networks ideological lean fox 2000 04 08 12 cnn msnbc more liberal if msnbc matched cnn ideologically, change in the republican nominees popular vote share: +0.06 in 2000 1.2 in 2004 0.09 in 2008

which brings us back to television  and in particular, the rise of partisan cable like fox news and msnbc. a recent analysis using large-scale data identifies cable television news as a major contributor to polarization. this narrative arguably fits with the timing of the rise in interparty animus, and it is consistent with the rise in polarization among groups  such as the elderly  with limited internet use but high rates of television viewing.

we would also look to the behavior of politicians and the parties. data from congressional roll-call voting show that the increase in polarization in the senate and house started well before it can be detected for voters, and though elected leaders follow their constituents much of the time, they can also lead them. today the parties seem to speak different languages, with republicans talking about illegal aliens and the death tax while democrats talk about undocumented workers and the estate tax. an analysis of the congressional record that gentzkow and shapiro conducted with the statistician matt taddy finds that this linguistic rift opened up right around the time of the contract with america, when the republican leadership adopted a successful strategy of using wordcraft to frame the issues of the day.

where we suspect the most important causes lie is in the deeper structural changes that have caused the experiences of those in the red and blue parts of the country to diverge. a voters party identification is increasingly related to his or her position in the income distribution, with the top quintile containing disproportionately more republicans. at the national level, income inequality and polarization in congress track each other closely. furthermore, congressional districts that were adversely affected by the rise of chinese imports have been shown to elect less centrist representatives from both parties.

the social-media-as-villain narrative is gripping because it plays vividly to our fears. but that is not the only reason it holds such sway. it also lets us collectively off the hook. why are half of americans thinking and acting in ways the other half cannot comprehend? why did one of those halves choose donald trump to be their president? easy, the social media narrative would say: they were brainwashed. they were duped by the bad guys  fake news or russian robots or big-data-driven algorithmically targeted psi-ops propaganda.

at some fundamental level, they dont really mean what they are saying, and if only they werent so gullible or so vulnerable they would see things our way. to find solutions we dont need to look at our own behavior, or values, or consumption patterns  we just need to beat the bad guys at the gate.

advertisement continue reading the main story

as tempting as that story is, it is at best incomplete. like many inflection points in history, this one was probably not caused by any single change, but by the fact that many important changes happened to converge at the same time. the factors that likely matter the most are those that have caused the real experiences of americans to diverge.