heres my attempt at perspective:

tax policy swings back and forth with partisan control. ronald reagan cut taxes for the rich, and bill clinton raised them. george w. bush cut taxes on the rich, and barack obama raised them. now trump is on the verge of cutting them again. changes to the tax code are often ephemeral.

as chait wrote: indeed, the passage of the trump tax cuts will help lay the groundwork for their undoing by increasing the chances democrats regain control of congress. already, polls show the tax bill to be deeply unpopular, which is why republican leaders are rushing it through congress. they know its a political loser.

this bill doesnt change the rules. obamacare repeal would have. ive previously asked historians for modern parallels to obamacare repeal  that is, huge social programs that were established and then eliminated  and the historians struggled to come up with an answer. the reversal of reconstruction, and of basic rights for southern blacks, is probably the closest.

the repeal of obamacare would have haunted any future effort to improve life for middle-class and poor americans. the passage of a big tax cut for the rich will not.

(all of which is a good reminder not to ignore the possibility that republican leaders will try again to repeal obamacare.)

the tax bill is not a backdoor repeal of obamacare. yes, the bill would damage the quality of health insurance. and, yes, several republican senators  starting with susan collins  would be violating their own stated principles if they vote for the tax bill.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

but damage to obamacare isnt the same thing as a slippery slope toward the programs demise.

the two core pieces of obamacare are the subsidies that help middle-class families afford private insurance and the expansion of medicaid for working-class families. the tax bill doesnt get rid of either. instead, it will likely repeal the individual mandate  the requirement that people buy health insurance. as a result, health-insurance markets will suffer some turmoil, and costs for some families will rise.

advertisement continue reading the main story

most people who want health insurance will still be able to get it, though. and health care advocates can reduce the impact of the mandates repeal through public-information campaigns that encourage people to sign up. the elimination of the insurance subsidies and medicaid expansion would be qualitatively worse.

many big fights remain. the tax bills supporters have a clear vision, and theyve been surprisingly up front about that vision. the first step is to cut taxes. the second is to cut government programs like medicare, social security, medicaid and much else.

but this tax bill itself doesnt accomplish the second step (with the exception of some modest automatic cuts). republicans will have to pass other bills to shrink programs that benefit the middle class. democrats are already gearing up to have those debates, as they should be. a mcclatchy news headline yesterday: dems warn gop: were prepared for class war. debates over spending cuts are easier for democrats to win than debates over tax policy.

also, the middle-class tax increases that are lurking in the bill dont take effect for years. there is time to reverse them, and to raise taxes on the rich too.

meanwhile, the deficit increases wont ruin the economy. the self-proclaimed deficit hawks voting for the senate version of the bill, like jeff flake, are certainly being hypocritical. but the attention to their hypocrisy, deserved as it is, has obscured another problem: the (empty) rhetoric of those deficit hawks is wrongheaded, too.

the tax bill is bad, the debt is fine, as a vox piece by matthew yglesias put it, arguing for the end of a senseless state of debt panic. interest rates are low. the bond market doesnt seem worried about the tax bill, just as it wasnt worried about the deficit increases early in the obama administration.

eventually, the deficit and debt will be a problem, because the federal government still hasnt figured out how to pay for baby boomer retirement. but the deficit is not our most urgent economic problem. (what is? stagnant living standards for the majority of the population.) the tax bill is bad because of how it spends its money, not how much it spends.

again, as i said at the outset, this tax bill is dreadful. its a huge handout to those americans who least need one. i hope the bill doesnt become law. if it does, i hope it is reversed as quickly as possible. i just dont think the bill should be confused with some of the larger threats of the trump era. and despite the rushed process, lies and hypocrisies that got it this far, i dont think the bill should cause anyone to give up on politics.

advertisement continue reading the main story

elsewhere. i honestly dont know what to make of the accuracy of a story in the intercept reporting that trump may create a private intelligence service that reports only to him, lawfares susan hennessey wrote on twitter yesterday.

that said, to the extent this is a trial balloon, its one that should be shot down in an overwhelming show of force by national security professionals in and out of government.

so far, that hasnt happened.