to the editor:

james levine may well be a sinner, but i am less shocked by his sins than by how we instantly throw overboard people who, in the course of their long careers, have made such immense contributions to the world of music and society.

william j. dean, new york

to the editor:

i once attended a new york play reading about a reporter who discovered that a brilliant conductor had a 14-year-old lover. the play asked whether artistic genius transcended social norms. the consensus seemed to be that it did. during the talkback, one audience member said, i suppose by that age todays teenagers are having sex. upset, i strongly responded that such a relationship was wrong because teenagers are too young to be in such situations.

the room fell silent. i felt like the out-of-town hick that i was.

for the #metoo movement to be a cultural change and not just a social fad, we must recognize that nothing justifies adults having sex with non-adults, or powerful people harassing their prey. we must revoke the free passes that until just a few months ago we gave to those who are powerful, influential, creative, charismatic or brilliant.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

karla jennings, decatur, ga.

to the editor:

re should i put away my levine collection? (critics notebook, dec. 6):

anthony tommasinis article, asking whether he should remove his james levine recordings because of the allegations of sexual assault, raises a couple of interesting questions. one is whether we can or should separate the work of the artist from the human being.

should we poke around in the closets of all artists and approve only the works of those who are squeaky clean? spoiler alert: well be left with nothing. (as the apostle paul writes, all have sinned and fall short of the glory of god.)

second, in trashing mr. levines records, were trashing not just mr. levine, but also the work of the individual performers hes conducting. should their work also be banished in a sort of guilt by association? and as a society, are we not depriving ourselves of something beautiful because a flawed human being produced it?

drew snider

east sooke, british columbia

to the editor:

anthony tommasinis article quotes a 1998 interview in which james levine had asked, in effect, how good one has to before you are given a pass to keep your private life private? as we now know, mr. tommasini continues, he should never have gotten such a pass.

as we now know? talk about trial by newspaper! what we know is that mr. levine has been accused of sexual misconduct by several men. the accusations are serious and troubling. but they are just that  accusations  and we know that accusations are sometimes inaccurate. we do not know whether they are true or false in this case, and we do not know whether mr. levines conduct crossed the line separating the obnoxious or crude from the immoral and unpardonable.

in short, we dont know what, if anything, transpired between mr. levine and his accusers, and it is deeply unfair of mr. tommasini to suggest otherwise.

advertisement continue reading the main story

david post, washington