photo

to the editor:

re trump reverses u.s. protections for 2 utah sites (front page, dec. 5): as a backpacker and repeat visitor to grand staircase-escalante and bears ears national monuments, i awaited the trump administrations review of these monuments with apprehension.

these monuments are remarkably remote, rugged and inaccessible. but for those who brave the challenges, the reward is great. the experience of navigating the undulating bends of a slot canyon in grand staircase-escalante or stumbling upon 700-year-old pictographs in bears ears is unparalleled.

the antiquities act dictates that national monuments be confined to the smallest area compatible with proper care and management. however, the revised boundaries proclaimed by the administration fail to do even that. the landscapes, wilderness and antiquities that fall outside of these arbitrary lines, such as those of grand gulch or along hole in the rock road, represent some of the best that america has to offer.

stripping these areas of the protection afforded by their status as part of a national monument exposes these areas to sale, development, mining and/or the whims of congress. the damage to our shared national heritage would be tragic and irreversible. i fear that all too few would even know what we have lost.

advertisement continue reading the main story

nathaniel gilbert

chandler, ariz.

to the editor:

re the treasures of chaco canyon are threatened by drilling (sunday review, dec. 3): the virtual annihilation of bears ears national monument in utah and the disemboweling of the chaco canyon region in new mexico trample on the rights of minority peoples in favor of unnecessary resource exploitation. here we see another disgrace promulgated by the trump administration, compounded by disregard of science, history and true conservation.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

it is ironic that this administration endorses protecting confederate monuments while pillaging native american sacred sites and archaeological heritage. it is equally ironic that ryan zinke, the interior secretary, prides himself on being a conservationist in the tradition of theodore roosevelt, who, as you point out, designated chaco canyon as a national monument.