i understand that for too long people in power have looked the other way, and women have felt powerless and at the mercy of abusive men. thank god it appears this has changed. however, i fear that in some cases the pendulum has swung too far in the other direction.

is an accusation now considered to be proof of wrongdoing? if so, its going to be pretty easy for political opponents to drive every democrat out of office.

democrats said it was untenable for al franken to remain in the senate if their party hoped to maintain the high ground on the issue of sexual harassment. so faced with a trade-off between an effective and electable progressive legislator versus the symbolism of taking the high ground, the democrats in the senate have chosen to throw mr. franken under the bus.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

if he did what his accusers say he did, he should suffer some consequences, but in this case the punishment seems out of proportion to the accusations.

carl schroeder

olympia, wash.

to the editor:

re wnyc suspends two veteran hosts after accusations of misconduct (news article, dec. 7):

i am outraged about wnycs suspensions of leonard lopate and jonathan schwartz. mr. lopate was escorted out of wnyc without even being told the details of the charges so he can defend himself.

i take sexual harassment very seriously, having been a victim myself, but i believe in due process, and i also believe that the punishment or remedy must fit the crime or incident. in many of the cases so far, incidents of various seriousness seem to lead to immediate dismissal, which i have found disturbing. but the suspension of mr. lopate for no explicitly given reason and before any type of investigation is done is the most egregious so far.

once again the left is eating its own, while the right tends to deny serious and credible allegations. leonard lopate has shown dignity, intelligence and wit on public radio for more than 30 years. he does not deserve this stalinist treatment!

cheryl guttman, new york

to the editor:

re city ballet investigates its leader over letter (news article, dec. 5):

ballet is not a fuzzy area when it comes to sexual abuse. peter martinss artistic genius does not elevate him above the law; inappropriate, nonconsensual touching is abuse regardless of the industry. the same holds true for sexual harassment, which has little to do with touching one another through choreography and instruction.

in fact, arguably, the standard should be higher  not lower  in a field that employs so many young people and manifests such a stark power differential.

advertisement continue reading the main story

suzy upton, new york