photo

to the editor:

in almost a year of extraordinary behaviors by president trump and his team, the past few days may just be the most extraordinary. over the weekend a tweet from president trumps official twitter account seemed to say that the president was aware that michael flynn had lied to the f.b.i. and thats why he had to be fired. that sure sounds as if he was trying to obstruct justice when mr. trump later suggested to the f.b.i. director, james comey, that he should drop the f.b.i.s investigation of mr. flynn.

next, mr. trumps personal lawyer, john dowd, claimed that he, not the president, wrote that weekend tweet. seriously, who buys that? next, and most ominous, was mr. dowds incredible assertion that the president cant obstruct justice because he is the chief justice official in the country.

good grief. mr. dowds claim seems to say that the president is above the law and cannot be held legally accountable for what he says or does. mr. dowd, have you heard of congresss power to impeach a president?

mr. trumps legacy is evolving before our eyes. the picture is one of dysfunction and an undermining of the law, our democratic process and the constitution.

advertisement continue reading the main story

ken derow, swarthmore, pa.

to the editor:

re dont prosecute trump. impeach him (op-ed, dec. 5):

john yoo and saikrishna prakash make a dubious claim that president trump is above the law because, like a king, he is the law. they note that mr. trump claimed he fired james comey, the f.b.i. director, for not doing a good job,  when millions saw the president confess on national tv that he fired him because of this russia thing, and later confirmed that rationale to the russian ambassador and foreign minister in the oval office.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

the authors acknowledge that the president must take care that the laws be faithfully executed, but simultaneously contend that he is free to flout the law as a sovereign figure, including, apparently, in matters of personal misconduct.