mcgovern was one of only a dozen members of congress to speak up against the war in its opening stages. in early 1965, just after the bombing campaign known as rolling thunder began, he went on cbs news to denounce the operation, and he predicted a staggering loss of life out of all proportion to the stakes involved, creating such enormous instability that indeed we invite a much worse situation than the one that exists.

in june 1965, a month before johnson escalated the ground war, mcgovern pointed out that the viet cong were a part of the people and terrain and in many cases are farmers by day and fighters by night. to bomb them is to bomb the women and children, the villagers and peasants with whom they are intermingled. to destroy their crops is to destroy the countryside on which the general population depended. to escalate the war, he said, would only strengthen the guerrillas cause in the eyes of the south vietnamese and destroy the moral influence of the united states in asia.

by 1967 no country in the history of warfare had been subjected to heavier air assaults than vietnam. from march 1965 to december 1967, b-52s rained down 1.5 million tons of bombs  a half million on the north, a million on the south  exceeding the combined tonnage of bombs dropped by all the belligerents in world war ii. most of north vietnams infrastructure lay in ruins. napalm and agent orange had destroyed half of all of south vietnams forests. already nearly 16,000 american soldiers had lost their lives; over 60,000 had been wounded. vietnamese deaths numbered in the hundreds of thousands. to accomplish these feats, the united states was spending $2 billion a month, more than the war on povertys entire budget for 1966.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story subscribe to the vietnam 67 newsletter this weekly newsletter includes eyewitness accounts, rare photos and historical insights about the vietnam war. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

this insensate destruction of innocent lives and vietnams countryside impelled the greatest antiwar movement in american history. alongside the activists, a growing number of establishment democrats, including senators eugene mccarthy and robert kennedy, at last joined mcgovern in openly opposing the war.

in april 1967 these developments moved johnson to call gen. william westmoreland home to assure americans there was light at the end of the tunnel. when the general denounced recent unpatriotic acts here at home that fed enemy morale, the next day mcgovern responded with a speech he called the lesson of vietnam, which the times reprinted. of all the speeches on that subject, kennedy would later say, this one had the greatest influence across the country.

i do not intend to remain silent in the face of what i regard as a policy of madness, mcgovern began. this conflict was the most tragic diplomatic and moral failure in our national experience, for it was a defeat for america whether we win or lose.  and if it did not end soon, our dreams of a great society and a peaceful world will turn to ashes. only by a crude misreading of history and a distortion of our most treasured ideals could anyone defend the war, essentially a civil conflict among various groups of vietnamese. the challenge of communism in any event could not be met by forcing an american solution on a people still in search of their own national identity.

above all, americans must learn that conflicts of this kind have historical dimensions that are essentially political, economic and psychological; they do not respond readily to military force from the outside, mcgovern said. corrupt regimes like the one in saigon did not deserve to be saved by the blood of american boys. congress, he concluded, must never again surrender its power under our constitutional system by permitting an ill-advised, undeclared war, thus rendering its function very largely one of acquiescence.

advertisement continue reading the main story

a year later, in the wake of the tet offensive, johnsons withdrawal from politics and the assassinations of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr. and robert kennedy, a draft mcgovern movement thrust the senator into the contest for the 1968 democratic presidential nomination. he did not win the nomination, but he emerged from the disastrous chicago convention with an enhanced reputation; national publications named him one of the three most likely prospects for 1972, while south dakotans re-elected him to the senate by a 58 point margin of victory in november.

mcgovern ran for, and won, the 1972 nomination, and then got crushed by richard nixon in one of the most lopsided elections in american history. but lost in the banner headline of his defeat was the vision of political liberalism and america that the senator brought to the campaign trail: an all-embracing rethinking of american internationalism, a critical treatise on the original notion of the american century itself.

mcgovern actually asked his fellow citizens to think critically about their own country  in particular, about american military and economic interventionism in the third world and about a nuclear arsenal of such size as to threaten human existence. while millions of americans did not have enough to eat or a decent place to live, he argued, the cold war squandered untold treasure that might have been far better spent on programs for economic and social reform; the united states could never fulfill its promise around the globe if it did not fulfill its promise at home.

in december 1968, mcgovern was invited to contemplate the future in an address to the american historical association in new york. as a practicing politician increasingly grateful for his own historical education, the senator said, he believed the quest for a more peaceful international community is the most crucial task of our age. it was his conviction that the only potential gain that could come of the war in vietnam was the humility and wisdom that may guide us toward a more rational view of our future role in the international community.

the real issue is whether the united states shall continue to intervene unilaterally in the affairs of other states as we have done during the 1960s, he said, or seek to move away from this go-it-alone approach toward a greater measure of international cooperation based on a respect for the worlds diversity.

mcgovern could not have guessed that the war would go on for another four years  nor, for that matter, that he had put his finger on the core problem of american foreign policy that would endure into the 21st century.