then again, some of his tweets are slyly funny. he has a capacity for answering questions in a reasonably coherent way. and theres no getting away from the purely instrumental benefits he derives with his seemingly insane tweets. he baits his critics. he delights his fans. and he debases the currencies of civility and normal politics to the point where we are all sinking to his level.

gail: one part of the disconnect in his behavior is longstanding. he always was a guy who could sit down with people who were in theory his adversaries and be very pleasant and agree with everything they said. and then walk away as if it had never happened. so now we see trump with the democrats, having dinner and toasting the dreamers, and then the next day hes screaming about them being soft on immigration and weak on crime.

hes also always had a problem remembering inconvenient facts. but if were now dealing with a guy who seriously believes that the voice on that access hollywood tape is not really his, thats super scary.

bret: i doubt he really believes that. or rather, this is a guy whose entire career has been dedicated to two timeless propositions. first, that theres a sucker born every minute. second, that the truth is whatever he can get away with.

whether hes crazy or not, its important for his opponents to presume he isnt. his behavior has a certain pattern, and those patterns can be politically effective. speaking of which, what do you make of his latest claim that the f.b.i.s reputation is in tatters?

gail: bottom line: never a good plan for a president to denounce the f.b.i. also, when he starts yowling that james comey was helping hillary clinton, i just sort of fall off a mental cliff.

one of the ironies of the last week has been the way trumps behavior managed to almost completely obliterate attention on the big tax bill. which i guess is going to become law.

advertisement continue reading the main story

can we take a short break from the mental health of our chief executive to talk about it? what do you think?

bret: i know were all supposed to be passionate about it, one way or another, but im reserving judgment. this is another we have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it kind of deal of the sort that republicans complained so bitterly about during the obamacare debate.

gail: the scene was indeed very similar in a number of ways to the obamacare finale. however, i feel impelled to point out that the health care bill had tons of public hearings and committee meetings. there seems to be a rule in this congress that the more important the bill, the more you have to hide it from the public. even the concealed-carry gun bill thats zooming through the house never got a public hearing.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

but go ahead, about taxes 

bret: thats true. we are in white-water rapids legislative territory here. but about this bill. things i like: a lower corporate tax rate and a vehicle for repatriating capital back to the united states. generally lower tax rates for all income brackets. a higher alternative minimum tax threshold. the opening of alaskan hinterlands for oil and gas drilling. the tax break on (usually small) pass through companies. the increase in the child tax credit. the near elimination of the estate tax, which ive always considered immoral.

things i dont: the possibility of a fourth tax bracket, which could push tax rates above 50 percent for people who live in places like, er, manhattan. the elimination of the health insurance mandate, which i might have supported in a broader health care reform but seems like a way of gutting the current system without reforming it. the harvard tax on large university endowments, which may have the satisfaction of sticking it to liberals but damages great universities that are crown jewels of our society.

look, most of our readers arent going to agree with me on any of this. but the markets on which many of our readers depend through their iras and 401(k)s are cheering. and all that corporate profitability will work its way through a private economy that seems to be booming again.

gail: the thing that scares me most  and i could not be more surprised this is my big worry  is the way the bill sends the deficits skyrocketing. normally, deficits do not figure on my list of top 50 concerns.

but i have two great fears. one is that the economy is going to become seriously overheated. we already have a very low unemployment rate, a shortage of new immigrant families to expand the younger population, and a stock market thats hitting historic peaks every day, much to our presidents delight. im afraid a new surge  fueled by the government spending money  is going to pop the bubble and push us toward a really mean recession.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the other is that republicans are already looking at said deficit, licking their chops and preparing to cut entitlements. youve already got the president talking about how were looking very strongly at welfare reform. by which he presumably means those two huge programs he swore hed never touch during the election.

but then weve already pretty much agreed that nothing donald trump says counts for anything.

bret: we have got to be careful about calling social security benefits an entitlement, as readers sometimes remind us. we paid for them, after all.

gail: yeah, thats why were entitled. but i take your point. go ahead.

bret: i guess it all depends on what kind of reform we get. we have a system that expected us to die in our 60s thats now overstretched as we live into our 80s. that will need to change somehow and better to do it before we reach a crisis.

gail: yeah, weve really let the government down with all this  living.

i vote for a long-term fix by raising the current cap on payroll taxes. but that can be a debate for another time. go ahead.

bret: on the economy overheating and combusting, well, we havent had a recession for almost eight years, so we are overdue. on the other hand, we had a very slow and weak recovery, so im not complaining about sustained 3 percent growth after all these years. the truth is: nobody knows when the next recession will hit, or how hard it would be (and anyone who claims to is a liar).

what i do know is that if the economy does do well, trump will claim, and the g.o.p., will get, the credit. and i dont see democrats taking that politically into account. too many eggs in the impeachment basket, methinks. which makes me wonder: where do you think robert mueller and the russia investigation go from here?

gail: i am sad to admit that mueller doesnt confide in me. obviously, theres a lot of evidence about people in the trump campaign talking with the russians when they shouldnt have, about everything from the obama sanctions to israel. but the big issue is whether the investigation provides evidence that the russians conspired with the trump campaign to influence the outcome of our election. it seems pretty clear to me they did, but proving it is another matter.

certainly something to look forward to in the new year. whats your bet?

bret: the cover-up is usually the crime, and with trumps tweet suggesting he knew flynn had lied to the f.b.i, and now his desperate backpedaling, we have what seems to me a clear-cut case of obstruction of justice, assuming you dont believe the president is ipso facto above the law.

advertisement continue reading the main story

gail: good old obstruction of justice.

bret: i dont think anyone really knows whether there was collusion during the campaign, but thats why weve empowered a special counsel to find out. my conservative friends keep saying that this is a fishing expedition and that mueller should be fired because hes too close to the f.b.i. why dont we just let him do his job?

here is what we know. the former national security adviser lied to the f.b.i. he appears to have been directed to make contact with the russians by the presidents son-in-law, who may have been speaking on his father-in-laws behalf. one former campaign aide who lied to the f.b.i. appeared to have no role in the campaign other than to establish contacts with the russians. the former campaign chairman was, at a minimum, vulnerable to russian blackmail on account of his allegedly illicit business ties with a corrupt ukrainian president. the president of the united states kept bending over backward to make nice to vladimir putin and does so to this day. this president also had longstanding ambitions to do business in russia. the presidents son held a meeting with russian figures in hopes of finding dirt on hillary clinton.

fire? maybe not. but we are dying of smoke inhalation.

gail: plus we know from an upcoming book written by two more of his former aides that trump inhaled enough fast food every day to clog the arteries of a rhinoceros. bottom line, bret, is were going to be having a whole lot of interesting discussions as we move into 2018. if the smoke doesnt get to us first.