just tell them and they believe you. thats trumps credo. in the same way he believes women appreciate his grab-em-by-the-pussy approach. the president believes what he wants to believe.

with the power he has he thinks he can shape an alternate reality and persuade enough americans of its authenticity to perpetuate his power. he believes he can turn americans from citizens into apprentices. apprentices, in his experience, are pliable to his whim.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

in george orwells novel, nineteen eighty-four, the chief protagonist, winston smith, meets an acquaintance at an interrogation center and asks why he is there.

to tell you the truth, the friend replies. there is only one offense, is there not?

truth telling is the fundamental, unpardonable offense in any unfree society. the only truth in a totalitarian system is lies. trump attacks truth because he cannot bear the mirror it holds up to him, the emptiness it unmasks. he is drawn to the worlds despots, rather than its democrats, because they can make stuff up and get away with it.

american democracy is so tiresome. journalists and judges raise their voices. contestation occurs. trump would like to dispense with all this insofar as he can.

theresa may, britains conservative prime minister, tried to cozy up to trump because she needed to offset the disaster of brexit with an invigorated anglo-american special relationship. she tried, really she did; she wanted a free trade deal with the united states that badly. trump received an invitation for a state visit. it has become an embarrassment. even may ended up in dismay.

trumps retweeting last month of anti-muslim videos from a far-right british group prompted an indignant response from mays office. there you have it: the leader of the free world (r.i.p. that notion) sharing neo-fascist xenophobia, without so much as an apology. there can be no doubt that its not jihadists trump hates, its muslims (with the possible exception of glad-handing saudi royals.) his travel ban, now approved by the supreme court, was driven by prejudice not reason.

advertisement continue reading the main story

this is an embarrassment. worse, its shameful.

angela merkel, the german chancellor and the most powerful leader in europe, was alert to trumps bigotry from the outset. as noted in william drozdiaks fascinating book on europe, fractured continent, merkel insisted that, fighting terrorism should not be a reason for blanket stigmatization. as drozdiak also chronicles, she told viktor orban, hungarys nationalist prime minister: i grew up staring at a wall in my face. and i am determined not to see any more barriers being erected in europe.

principles, and western values, have not yet disappeared from the face of the earth. but merkel, like many allies struggling to make any sense of trumps outbursts, has few illusions: we europeans must really take our fate into our own hands.

so must americans if they are to resist trumps contempt for truth. its not just about the next election. its about the republic.