our point is not that forcing people to sell a product or service for an event always compels them to endorse the event. its that forcing them to create speech celebrating the event does. and its well-established that first amendment speech includes creative work (artistic speech) ranging from paintings to video games.

unlike folding chairs or restaurant service, custom wedding cakes are full-fledged speech under the first amendment. creating them cannot be conveniently classified as conduct, not expression to rationalize state coercion.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

after all, the aesthetic purpose of wedding cakes  combined with the range and complexity of their possible designs  makes them just as capable of bearing expressive content as other artistic speech. mr. phillipss cakes are admired precisely for their aesthetic qualities, which reflect his ideas and sensibilities. a plaster sculpture of the same size and look would without question be protected. that wedding cakes are edible is utterly beside the point. their main purpose isnt to sate hunger or even please the palate; it is aesthetic and expressive. they figure at receptions as a centerpiece and then part of the live program, much like a prop in a play. and no one denies that forcing artists to design props for plays promoting a state-imposed message would be unconstitutional.

if wedding cakes are expressive, whether by words or mere festive design, whats their message? we can tell by their context since, as the court notes, a symbolic items context may give meaning to the symbol. thus, the court found that an upside-down flag with a peace sign carried an antiwar message  protected as speech  because of the context of its display. likewise, a wedding cakes context specifies its message: this couple has formed a marriage. when the specific context is a same-sex wedding, that message is one mr. phillips doesnt believe and cannot in conscience affirm. so coercing him to create a cake for the occasion is compelled artistic speech.

note that this argument wouldnt cover all requirements to make artistic items. the law may force photographers to do photo portraits for latinos as well as whites since that doesnt yet force them to create art bearing an idea they reject, which is all the compelled-speech doctrine forbids. but custom wedding cakes carry a message specific to each wedding: this is a marriage.

can colorado justify its compulsion anyway? some say yes: fighting discrimination  disfavored conduct, not speech  is the general goal of colorados public-accommodations law. and if that goal is legitimate, they continue, so is every application of this law.

remarkably, given how commonly one encounters this answer, the court has explicitly considered and rejected it twice. in hurley v. irish-american gay, lesbian, and bisexual group of boston (1995), the court held that while anti-discrimination laws do not as a general matter violate the first amendment, they do when applied in a peculiar way that burdens speech. in that case and in boy scouts of america v. dale (2000), the government said there was sexual-orientation discrimination, both times under its public-accommodations laws. the goal in both was to fight discrimination rooted in opposition to homosexual conduct. still, the court said both times, this generic goal could not justify coercion that interfered with the content of anyones expression.

advertisement continue reading the main story

in these cases, after all, the precise act being targeted just is the speakers choosing (discriminating) among which ideas to express  exactly what the first amendment exists to protect. as the court put it in hurley, the point of all speech protection is to shield just those choices of content that in someones eyes are misguided, or even hurtful.

so to use the force of law to compel mr. phillips to create same-sex wedding cakes, colorado must identify another goal. is it to ensure that all couples have access to a cake? but they do: colorado hasnt even suggested otherwise. choices like mr. phillipss amount to a handful in a country of 300 million people, according to andrew koppelman, a constitutional scholar and gay-rights advocate.

the only claim left is that mr. phillipss expressive choice causes what some refer to as dignitary harm: the distress of confronting ideas one finds demeaning or hurtful. yet accepting that justification would shatter what the court in texas v. johnson (1989) called a bedrock principle  namely that the government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea itself offensive.

at some level, colorado itself gets it. three times the state has declined to force pro-gay bakers to provide a christian patron with a cake they could not in conscience create given their own convictions on sexuality and marriage. colorado was right to recognize their first amendment right against compelled speech. its wrong to deny jack phillips that same right.