fortunately, we live in a democracy with institutions  including the f.b.i.  that have the ability to push back against his attempts to monopolize information. but trumps tactics should alarm everyone. our democratic institutions wont remain strong unless the country fights for them. they are under attack in a way they have never been before in our lifetimes.

related: billy bush has an op-ed in todays times about the access hollywood tape, on which trump bragged to bush about molesting women.

tax cuts, medicare cuts. just before 2 a.m. saturday, the senate passed a tax bill without giving many members time to read the bill and without holding hearings on the bills major provisions.

im trying to think of a historical precedent for this, but im coming up completely blank, the historian kevin m. kruse tweeted. when some people responded by asking about obamacare, kruse calmly enumerated the months of debate and hearings over it  all of which are in stark contrast to what just happened.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

now that the tax cut is headed toward becoming law, the focus of congress is turning to spending cuts, including to medicare. im quite curious whether senator susan collins, the maine republican who says she opposes such cuts, will really be willing to vote for the final bill.

lost einsteins. the map at the top of this newsletter comes from a big new academic study that offers the clearest picture yet of where american inventors come from. and its a worrisome picture.

even when low- and middle-income children excel in school, theyre very unlikely to grow up and become patent holders  much less likely than affluent children. women are also much less likely to become patent holders, as are african-americans, latinos and people who grew up in the southeast.

advertisement continue reading the main story

thats why the headline on my column uses the phrase lost einsteins. this isnt just a matter of fairness. its also about the societal cost of the innovations were losing. the congressional tax plan, by the way, will aggravate the problem.

the flynn plea. the most consequential charges against michael flynn were the ones robert mueller didnt levy against flynn, writes former f.b.i. agent asha rangappa in the washington post. mueller would offer this kind of a deal  potentially letting off flynn easy  only if he could get testimony that helps his case against the most senior campaign officials.

in the times, the editorial board along with richard painter and norman eisen offer their takes on flynns guilty plea.



how trump-friendly media reacted. breitbarts joel pollak defended trump, denouncing muellers probe as the swamps political revenge and arguing that flynns russian back-channel is not illegal, and may even have been a good idea.

but  in a move trump-friendly media has used to shield the president from blame on other issues  pollak did fault members of the administration. he mocked ty cobb, a white house lawyer, as a beltway lawyer, calling cobbs prediction that the mueller inquiry is nearing its end borderline delusion. despite no evidence of collusion, as pollak claimed on msnbc, trump might want to sue his lawyer  for malpractice.

the presidents defenders also seized on a times report that mueller had dismissed a possibly anti-trump f.b.i. official from his team as proof of bias. you get a picture that this investigation is out to get the president, said newsmaxs chris ruddy, a trump confidante, on abc yesterday. still, he acknowledged that flynns plea deal poses an existential threat to the trump presidency.

the full opinion report from the times follows.