given the national wave of firings for sexual harassment, and the clear and compelling allegations of so many women against mr. trump, whats to be done?

heres a way forward:

the f.b.i. should depose mr. trump under oath, and either he admits to the allegations of sexual assault (and gets fired for them like everyone else in every other walk of life), or he lies, including about his voice on the access hollywood tape (and gets himself indicted on a charge of lying to the f.b.i.).

what poetic justice if for such a blatant lie the f.b.i. topples the man besmirching its fine work and sterling reputation.

james s. berkman, boston

to the editor:

i have but one simple question for nbc and the american public: why was billy bush the only person to lose his job over the crass statements of donald trump on the access hollywood tape?

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

lynn meyer brown

philadelphia

to the editor:

i would ask the millions who voted for donald trump despite the access hollywood tape: if he had been boasting in his locker room talk about grabbing the genitals of your daughter, your sister or your mother, would you have still looked the other way?

robert j. inlow

charlottesville, va.

to the editor:

re flynn pleads guilty; will aid inquiry (front page, dec. 2):

any elation i feel that the cooperation of michael t. flynn, president trumps former national security adviser, with the special counsel might mark the beginning of the end for donald trumps presidency is tempered by my anxiety over the presidents possible response.

indeed, this dangerous time for mr. trump is dangerous as well for the country, as this man, who has no discernible boundaries, fights to save himself and his presidency.

mr. trump fired james b. comey, the f.b.i. director; what measures will he now take under much more dire threat? how will the public, public institutions and the media react to his actions?

advertisement continue reading the main story

and how will this president with deeply authoritarian tendencies respond to resistance, such as by imposing restraints on the press and public assembly?

i dont think my scenario is the product of paranoid delusion. donald trump is a president unlike any who have held the office and from whom no behavior, no matter how unprecedented or unlawful, can be ruled out.

david sirota, new york