in 1966 the national labor relations board decided that this issue for workers  specifically, a lack of information with respect to one of the choices available  impeded their free choice in voting. the board declared that employers must provide unions with a master list of their employees, an excelsior list, to ensure that union supporters could make their case to everyone before the election.

a complete list of employees is no minor detail. it is crucial to fair union elections. that is why it was so egregious that harvard left over 500 eligible students off the excelsior list last year before a student vote on unionization.

incomplete or inaccurate excelsior lists can reduce voter turnout. in this case, the vote was very close. about 3,000 students cast ballots, but 314 were contested (including 195 ballots that are eligible but have not yet been counted). students lost by 185 votes.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

at large workplaces like universities, workers often dont know all of their colleagues, so communication can be limited without the excelsior list. and eligible voters who do not appear on the list may think they cant vote.

accordingly, the n.l.r.b. can regard any errors in an excelsior list  even the omission of just one employee  as inherently prejudicial to workers who seek to unionize.

the school claimed it had difficulty with the payroll system. regardless, it excluded over 10 percent of eligible student voters from the list, and the vote was immediately challenged. the regional labor board director ordered a new, fair election.

rather than comply, harvard appealed to the n.l.r.b. and asked its newly appointed trump-aligned majority to let employers argue they should be let off the hook for failing to create a complete and accurate excelsior list  challenging the necessity of the list itself.

advertisement continue reading the main story

elite universities have postured themselves as bulwarks against the trump administrations reactionary agenda, rightfully coming out in full force against the travel ban and changes to daca. but when it comes to labor rights, universities have been more than willing to partner with the forces they otherwise publicly condemn.

if the rules around excelsior lists are weakened, employers could get away with stifling communication between unions and employees. lobbying groups like the u.s. chamber of commerce and union-avoidance law firms know this. they have long invited employers to challenge the underpinnings of the excelsior rule, seeking to deal labor organizing a deathblow.

were embarrassed that harvard took the bait. we came here to learn how to shape the law in service of justice for working americans, but our university is showing us just how easily it can be manipulated in the other direction. by asking the n.l.r.b. to chip away at excelsior lists to squelch student workers attempt to organize, harvard risks making the uphill battle of unionizing an even steeper task for all american workers.

we were arguably nave to hope that harvard would take the high road and drop its appeal given its shameful record of cutting benefits from its lowest-paid workers. last year, harvards dining service workers went on strike for several weeks before the university agreed to a modest pay increase and affordable health care. the richest university in the country, with an endowment of over $37 billion, agreed to raise dining service workers salaries by 3.5 percent only after a 22-day union strike.

harvard law school boasts that its mission is to educate leaders who contribute to the advancement of justice and the well-being of society. its a shame the school wont lead by example.