ms. brown was tried as an adult in 2006 and given a life sentence, which she is serving in the tennessee prison for women in nashville. she will not be eligible for parole until 2055, when she will be 67 years old.

those who follow the issue of restorative justice have known ms. browns name for years. there is a 2011 documentary, me facing life, dealing with her predicament, which became a factor in changing the way that tennessee deals with child prostitution cases. but she only burst into the national consciousness last month when the #freecyntoia hashtag went viral. (rihannas initial post on instagram alone received almost two million likes.)

fortunately, most american women cannot say #metoo about such a horrific ordeal. but the truth is that there are many more cyntoia browns in our midst than we would like to think.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

consider the case of sara kruzan. her father was incarcerated, and a trafficker named george gilbert howard, 20 years her senior, began grooming her for sex work when she was just 11 years old. in 1995, at age 17, she killed him and was sentenced to life in prison without parole in california.

evidence of the abuse she suffered was deemed inadmissible at her trial. though recent studies estimate that a staggering 86 percent of women in jail have suffered some form of sexual violence, the criminal justice system routinely fails to take this into account.

twelve years into her sentence, ms. kruzan received a break when human rights watch brought national attention to her case, prompting the governor at the time, arnold schwarzenegger, to commute her sentence. she was granted parole in 2013.

i recently spoke to ms. kruzan and elizabeth calvin of human rights watch, who now collaborate to end the use of life sentences without parole for minors. sara and cyntoia are not unique, ms. calvin told me. such abuse, ms. kruzan stressed, is protected by silence.

advertisement continue reading the main story

ms. kruzan told me about the case of a woman named laverne dejohnette, a californian serving a life sentence for murder whose story has not gone viral. ms. dejohnettes father was a trafficker and her mother was trafficked. like many women in prison, laverne was sexually abused within her family and is a survivor of incest, ms. kruzan told me. she was sexually trafficked by her own parents, yet the mitigating factors of her abuse were not taken into account. these are stories of relentless violence and forgetting, ms. calvin said. society forgets these people exist.

for all of the women who have had the strength to share their #metoo stories, there remain so many women in our culture, most of them poor women of color, who lack the resources or opportunities to add their voices to the growing chorus.

without for a moment diminishing the pain and suffering  whether physical or emotional  of any woman who has now found the voice to speak out against sexism and harassment, for this moment of collective awakening to have a deeper significance, we have to address a very serious question. if ambitious, highly educated, well-compensated women at major news organizations are being harassed and assaulted with impunity, what is happening to poor and working-class black, brown and white women outside the medias glare?

the deeper question may be whether we really want to know. nietzsche believed the lower you ventured on the social hierarchy, the less suffering mattered. the curve of human susceptibility to pain seems in fact to take an extraordinary and almost sudden drop as soon as one has passed the upper ten thousand or ten million of the top stratum of culture, he wrote in on the genealogy of morals. comparing africans (and laboratory animals) to a representative of the white upper class, he concluded, with some disdain, that all their torment combined is utterly negligible compared with one painful night of a hysterical bluestocking.

such talk now seems monstrous, yet a visitor from outer space could be forgiven for thinking that many of us continue to see things this way.