to understand the social conservatives dilemma isnt to excuse the vile personal conduct of a figure like mr. moore. but if you believe, as they (and i) do, that a public culture informed by the bible and traditional morality is essential to americas constitutional order, then the stakes are high indeed.

ultimately, however, social conservatives strike a terrible bargain when they support men like roy moore.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

they seem to think, first, that placing originalist judges on the federal bench is the only path to political success in america. i cant tell you how many times i have heard some variation on the line: trump brought us neil gorsuch. you like gorsuch, dont you? the answer is yes. i have written in praise of the justice, especially his cleareyed view of the danger that euthanasia poses to the weakest americans.

but any of the other 16 non-vulgar, non-erratic republican candidates in 2016 would also have nominated a gorsuch. we look to our lawmakers not just to enact policies, but also to represent our nation on the global stage with the dignity that their offices demand. american exceptionalism is set back every time the president takes to twitter to ridicule the least of these our brethren, as the gospel puts it. likewise, the worlds greatest deliberative body will be tainted if mr. moore is seated in the senate.

well, respond the trumpian conservatives, our vote is just the opener. we will call our leaders moves as we see them  the good and the bad.

except they dont. they might take issue with this or that white house policy. but they rarely if ever call out the presidents moral degradations. and such criticism is the only kind that truly irritates mr. trump.

thats precisely why the likes of the rev. jerry falwell jr. shy away from it  even to the point of contorting themselves to defend mr. trumps unconscionable response to white-nationalist violence in charlottesville, va. idolatry of class, nation, race and leader is a constant temptation for people of faith, and too many are succumbing to it today.

advertisement continue reading the main story

behind social conservatives trumpian turn, i suspect, is deep pessimism about americas future. many fear that under secularisms relentless onslaught, judeo-christianity will be banished permanently from the public square. i feel similar angst.

but then i look back on the late 20th century, when, thanks to heroic figures such as pope john paul ii, the christian idea bested soviet communism, an ideology that was far more hostile to religious faith than americas enlightenment liberalism has ever been. i also look to the explosive growth of christianity in places like china and iran today.

unlike under communism or irans islamic theocracy, christianity in america has the first amendment and freedom of conscience. and there are other reasons to be optimistic about our place in the culture in the long term. the cascading harassment scandal, for one thing, suggests that even liberals may rethink some aspects of the sexual revolution. and if ultra-permissive liberalism is passing away, then the people who grew up in its wreckage will eventually turn toward tradition.

christians are called to live in faith, hope and charity. political fear should never drive them to tie their fate to the roy moores of the world.