"a large man walked up to me, and i saw that he was saying something to me, but i couldnt hear him. did he need directions? i took out my headphones to hear what he was saying. he walked up to me, until there was a half-foot of space between us. 'are you gonna take care of me?' he said. i didnt fully understand what was happening, but he repeated himself to make sure he was heard. 'i said, are you gonna take care of me?' he then started rubbing himself while repeating that question over and over. i just stood there, frozen, having absolutely no idea what i should do in this situation." - @schirmernator #stopstreetharassment a post shared by @catcallsofnyc on dec 6, 2017 at 3:02pm pst

a student at new york university is hoping to bring attention to the catcalls and harassment faced by female new yorkers on a daily basis.

sophie sandberg, 21, has taken to writing down the harassers remarks directly on the sidewalks where the catcalls occurred, and uploading photos of her work to an instagram account called catcalls of nyc.

european woman takes selfies with catcallers for viral instagram account

collecting incidences of crude catcalls from her instagram followers, sandberg goes to the location where each harrasing incident allegedly took place and writes down the remarks in big, colorful sidewalk chalk. some of the less vulgar instances include statements like, oh, so you just gonna ignore me? you're ugly anyway, or wow, beautiful  call me in three years.

"when i was 15 years old, walking down a street with a couple of friends, we passed this small group men who were at least twice our age. one of them motioned his hand towards me and said: 'wow...beautiful. call me in 3 years!' he said more after that, but i felt immediately violated, and helpless. he was aware that i was a child, a teenager, had no regard for my peace of mind and decided that everyone around us needed to know that i was an object of his desire. i remember feeling afraid, and ashamed of myself from my first cat call." - @akehau #stopstreetharassment a post shared by @catcallsofnyc on nov 12, 2017 at 8:40am pst

in many other instances, the catcalls were much more obscene, and some quickly turned vicious or racist after the harassers remarks were ignored.

it amazes me how men think they somehow deserve our attention... and when we don't give it to them we are "ugly" "rude" or "disrespectful" #stopstreetharassment a post shared by @catcallsofnyc on apr 21, 2016 at 11:02am pdt

a post shared by @catcallsofnyc on nov 8, 2017 at 1:26pm pst

models strip down in nyc to promote body positivity

as sandberg tells the huffington post, she herself has been the victim of harassing remarks since she was a teen, but never felt comfortable saying anything to her harassers in the moment.

its shaped my experience in public space, sandberg told the site. its affected my confidence and comfort walking down the street. its silenced me  ive never felt comfortable responding to catcalls, as much as id like to tell these men off.

"today i was rushing to the train and a man called out 'want a ride, baby' and gestured to his crotch. when i didn't respond, he shouted after me 'oh okay, you're gonna ignore me? i know your type. you think you're all that. but you're not. you think you're hot but you're not.'" - @robinjohnsonactress a post shared by @catcallsofnyc on nov 25, 2017 at 12:32pm pst

follow us on facebook for more fox lifestyle news

with her project, sandberg says she hopes that people who arent subjected to such catcalls will take notice of the problem, and together, they can work to deter this type of behavior.

one voice can contribute to a collective movement. with that, we have power and we cannot be silenced, she told the huffington post.