if he wins, he can thank al franken and jimmy kimmel among others.



by william mcgurn, the wall street journal



when alabamans go to the polls a week from now in a special election to choose their next senator, not even mrs. roy moore will be rooting as hard for her republican husband as the junior senator from minnesota, al franken.

the reason is simple. mr. franken knows that if mr. moore takes his senate seat, it becomes less likely the former saturday night live comic will have to relinquish his. and therein lies a larger tale about how the liberal opposition to mr. moore may be backfiring.

until this race, plausible accusations that a candidate had engaged in sexual conduct with girls as young as 14 would be enough to sink most any man. coming as these charges do amid a national sexual reckoning that has already brought down many powerful men hitherto thought untouchable, they ought to be even more potent.

but mr. moore is not sinking. to the contrary, at last check the real clear politics polling average gives him a 2.6-point lead. a cbs news poll released this past weekend has him up by 6 points.

if mr. moore does win, it will be despite calls by republicans and conservatives for him to step aside. the calls have come from republican leaders such as senate majority leader mitch mcconnell and house speaker paul ryan, among others.

then again, the remaining gop support, including that of alabama gov. kay ivey and now president donald trump, may carry more pull. mr. moore further benefits from the backing of the evangelical community, many of whose pastors have stuck with him.

but theres another potent force in this race, which gets little media attention. these are the liberals who are enabling him. lets run through a short list:

 bill clinton . remember the argument it was only sex? or reporter nina burleigh saying shed be happy to give then-president clinton oral sex just to thank him for keeping abortion legal?

some who backed mr. clinton now recognize that their unqualified support through all his lies and bad behavior leaves them in a poor position to lecture others about how to treat women, or why policy should not trump character. now they are throwing mr. clinton under the bus to try to regain the moral high ground. how persuasive must alabamans find this?

 doug jones. he is the democrat in the race. when your rival is credibly accused of sexual misbehavior with underage girls, the race is yours to lose. and yet mr. jones is doing his best to do just that, over a classic democratic blind spot: abortion.

alabama is one of americas most pro-life states. mr. jones might have expanded his appeal by opting for the bill clinton formula of safe, legal and rare, or supporting popular restrictions such as the ban after 20 weeks. instead, mr. jones has opted for the hillary clinton view that abortion must be sacrosanct. if he ends up losing, abortion will be a big reason.

 al franken. on the hypocrisy front theres plenty on all sides to go around. still, it has to be hard for alabama republicans not to notice that they are being called on to reject their guy at a time when democrats are keeping theirs.

 jimmy kimmel. mr. kimmel recently dispatched a comedian to heckle mr. moore at a rally at the magnolia springs baptist church. he succeeded in disrupting the event. mr. kimmel and mr. moore then got into a twitter tiff after mr. moore suggested mr. kimmel put up his dukes, and mr. kimmel accepted.

mr. kimmel and his audience have had some good yucks at the expense of the local yokels. but again, just a guess that this may not be playing as well in alabama.