forty-five million christmas island red crabs are on the move for their once-a-year migration to breed  and so to is the indian ocean settlement that still calls australia home despite sitting just 350 kilometers south of java.

it was the 2001 tampa crisis that forever linked christmas island with boat people but now the australian outpost is desperate to shed this image and rebrand itself as australias galpagos islands with google playing a major hand.

parks australia has teamed up with the internet giant to map the migration which david attenborough once described as one of the worlds most astonishing sights for google maps street view.

the images are being used to enhance street view, a component of the companys google maps app, which will allow users to virtually experience the migration  and the island.

enter dr alasdair grigg, from parks australia and resident island expert.

dr grigg will spend more than 30 hours lugging around a 20kg trekker (a portable camera unit) through remote parts of the island during the mapping process. the trekker itself features a rosette of 15 fixed focal length camera which take a picture every 2.5 seconds.

googles software blends the exposures together, adjusting and correcting colours, brightness and other variables to create the final 360 degree view and on december 13 will capture the crabs spectacular spawning.

dr grigg said: christmas island is not on the radar of most travellers ... we hope people can get a taste of the migrant through the trekker  and are inspired to appreciate the conservation values of the island.

chairperson of christmas island tourism association lisa preston goes further to add  it is hoped international exposure will boost tourism numbers from the current 500 or so that visit the island annually.

and this in turn stimulates the economy.

the islands phosphate mining and immigration-related activities will not sustain the islands economy indefinitely. currently the mine employs just more than 100 people (about 30 people were made redundant last month) and the detention centre is due to close in june.

ms preston said: our national park is our best tourism asset ... you wont find anything like christmas island anywhere else in the world  and who better than google to help us get the message out there.

miranda schooneveldt spokeswoman for parks australia said virtual tours would inspire not just the rest of the world  but also australians  to visit the region.

we want to share the uniqueness and beauty of the island with everyone  if we can share this message then this also helps with conservation and google also understand and respect this message.

and lets be honest what an incredible island.

of those that make the flight to christmas island, out of perth, jakarta or kuala lumpur, most usually have a single purpose.

diving, birds ... and of course the crabs.

camilla ibrahim, from google australia & new zealand, said: the street view experience is about making places more accessible and inspiring people to appreciate our unique fauna and flora ... so much so that they do visit amazing places like christmas island.

googles virtual tour launch of uluru earlier this year  complete with rock paintings and interactive videos featuring traditional aboriginal song and dance  reached an audience of 400 million, according to parks australia.

it is yet to be seen if christmas island will capture the same attention but as tech companies chase potential advertising revenue from location targeted revenue  google will continue its journey into the remote parts of the globe with conservation a key message.

* the reporter travelled as a guest of google

fast facts

1. about 45 million crabs live on christmas island  the only place in the world where they are found.

2. migration begins start of wet season (usually october to december) and is dependent on the lunar phase  and the resultant tide.

3. you cannot eat red crabs.

4. park staff have built walls and plastic fencing along roads to funnel crabs to crossings, underpasses and a bridge.

5. many locals carry rakes in their car to clear a safe pathway on the roads.

6. a single female can brood up to 100,000 eggs.

7. crabs cannot swim but they go for a dip to keep themselves cool.

8. eggs hatch as soon as they hit the water and when ts happens looks like black ink is being released into the sea.

9. the sound of millions of crabs running along the forest floor sounds like the drumming of rain on a tin roof.

10. streets are closed off on the island while migration is happening and to protect the crabs.

this story originally appeared in news.com.au.