in episode 7 of cbs young sheldon the show took a break from its title character to focus on the cooper family. when sheldons dad and his grandmother butt heads, the kids worry that the falling out will lead to their parents divorcing.

the episode opens with the familys mouth watering over meemaws famous brisket, which many have called the best in texas. george sr. has been trying to get the recipe for years, but she refuses to give it up to anyone. during dinner, she tricks him into believing shell write it down for him... twice.

while it feels like a trivial family moment, later that night george sr. complains that meemaw has never been nice to him, and that his wife always siding with her mother doesnt help. the next day, he opts to stay home from a family trip to the church picnic. while hes got some time to himself, he makes a trip to meemaws house in an attempt to steal the brisket recipe. unfortunately for him, shed never write it down, and she can tell when her recipe list has been tampered with.

the next day, after hes had a fight with his wife about missing time with the family at the picnic, meemaw gives him the recipe saying that she doesnt want it to stand in the way of the family being together. however, the recipe is pretty convoluted - almost too convoluted to be real. a trip to new orleans for the world-famous cafe du monde coffee and a 14-hour cook time later, george sr. discovers that she tricked him a third time as punishment for the break-in.

visibly upset, he bursts into the house to yell at meemaw in front of everyone. thats when the kids notice that the situation is more dire than they thought. george jr. asks sheldon to help get the recipe into their fathers hands, thinking that will solve the issue. thats when sheldon leans on his photographic memory to recall a time when meemaw gave him the recipe while he was just a baby. one cant blame her, she had no clue what kind of brain she was dealing with at the time.

he calls the family into the living room where he reveals that he can give away the recipe. meemaw protests, prompting george sr. to say he doesnt want it anymore. thats when things get real.

it comes out that meemaw never thought george sr. was good enough for her daughter, what with his motorcycle and apparently unplanned pregnancy. george seems like hes going to get mad, but then softens. he recognizes that hed feel the same way if someone like that came sniffing around his daughter. however, he notes that hes come a long way since those days.

thats when meemaw softens as well and apologizes.

that means more to me than any recipe, he says, but its quickly revealed that he asked sheldon for the recipe immediately after she left.

just like that, the family was all back together. this time with two brisket chefs.