new york  november 21, 2017  fox news channel (fnc) has signed nationally syndicated radio talk show personality mark levin as host of life, liberty & levin, a new weekend primetime program debuting in february 2018, announced suzanne scott, president of programming.

airing each sunday at 10pm/et, life, liberty & levin will explore the fundamental values and principles undergirding american society, culture, politics, and current events, and their relevance to the nations future and everyday lives of citizens. the hour-long program will feature levins lively in-depth and long-form interviews and powerful debate style with consequential guests covering history, philosophy, and economics. levin will also capitalize on his extraordinary knowledge and compelling perspective as a constitutional lawyer to discuss the american founding, the declaration of independence, and the constitution.

in making the announcement, scott said, marks passion for the principles found in the constitution and success in talk radio has made him a distinct figure in the media landscape. we look forward to adding this spirited program to our weekend lineup.

levin added, i am honored to join fox news, a network i have enjoyed appearing on as a guest for quite some time. as a proud citizen of the united states, i am delighted to share the significance of american values with such a wide audience and look forward to engaging with important guests about crucial topics.

levin also hosts the third largest nationally syndicated radio program in america, the mark levin show, which airs on over 300 stations across the country and satellite radio, and is heard by millions of listeners every week, as well as levintv, an online television program broadcast on crtv. previously, levin served as an adviser to several members of president ronald reagans cabinet. he was chief of staff to then-attorney general edwin meese and held other positions including associate director of presidential personnel, deputy solicitor of the u.s. department of interior, and deputy assistant secretary of the u.s. department of education.

he is the recipient of numerous awards including the american conservative unions ronald reagan award, the media research centers william f. buckley award for media excellence, and the gene burns memorial award for freedom of speech. additionally, levin is a seven-time new york times bestselling author, which includes his latest book, rediscovering americanism: and the tyranny of progressivism.

fox news channel (fnc) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. the number one network in cable, fnc has been the most watched television news channel for more than 15 years and according to a suffolk university/usa today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. owned by 21st century fox, fnc is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

fox news media contact:

jaclyn giuliano/212.301.3436 or jaclyn.giuliano@foxnews.com