by kimberley a. strassel, the wall street journal



the media echo chamber spent the week speculating about whether special counsel robert mueller can or will nab president trump on obstruction-of-justice charges. all the while it continues to ignore washingtons most obvious obstructionthe coordinated effort to thwart congressional probes of the role law enforcement played in the 2016 election.

the news that senior fbi agent peter strzok exchanged anti-trump, pro-hillary text messages with another fbi official mattersthough weve yet to see the content. the bigger scandal is that the justice department, the federal bureau of investigation and mr. mueller have known about those texts for months and deliberately kept their existence from congress. the house intelligence committee sent document subpoenas and demanded an interview with mr. strzok. the justice department dodged, and then leaked.

the department also withheld from congress that another top official, associate deputy attorney general bruce ohr, was in contact with ex-spook christopher steele and the opposition-research firm fusion gps. it has refused to say what role the steele dossierclinton-commissioned oppo researchplayed in its trump investigation. it wont turn over files about its wiretapping.

and mr. muellerwho is well aware the house is probing all this, and considered the strzok texts relevant enough to earn the agent a demotionnonetheless did not inform congress about the matter. why? perhaps mr. mueller feels hes above being bothered with any other investigation. or perhaps his team is covering for the fbi and the justice department.

when deputy attorney general rod rosenstein appointed mr. mueller, he stressed that he wanted a probe with independence from the normal chain of command. yet the mueller team is made up of the same commanders who were previously running the trump show at the justice department and the fbi, and hardly distant from their old office.

andrew weissmann, mr. muellers deputy, is chief of the justice departments criminal fraud section and was once fbi general counsel. until mr. strzoks demotion, he was a top fbi counterintelligence officer, lead on the trump probe. michael dreeben is a deputy solicitor general. elizabeth prelogar, brandon van grack, kyle freeny, adam jed, andrew goldstein every one is a highly placed, influential lawyer on loan from the justice department. lisa page mr. strzoks mistress, with whom he exchanged those textswas on loan from the fbi general counsels office.

does anyone think this crowd intends to investigate justice department or fbi misdeeds? to put it another way, does anyone think they intend to investigate themselves?