pink has opened up about how shes raising her kids as gender neutral, and shared what she really thinks of donald trump.

the beautiful trauma singer told the people that she does not want to impose traditional gender roles on her two children, six-year-old daughter willow and 11-month-old son jameson.

we are a very label-less household, the pop star said of her family with motorcycle racer carey hart.

last week willow told me she is going to marry an african woman. i was like: great, can you teach me how to make african food? pink said.

and shes like: sure mama, and we are going to live with you while our house is getting ready.

the singer also shared her reaction to seeing a gender neutral bathroom in a school.

i was in a school and the bathroom outside the kindergarten said: gender neutral  anybody, and it was a drawing of many different shapes.

i took a picture of it and i wrote: progress. i thought that was awesome. i love that kids are having this conversation, the 38-year-old told the people.

the singer was applauded earlier this year when she delivered a heartwarming speech at the vmas in which she explained the true meaning of beauty to her daughter after the six-year-old told her im the ugliest girl i know and that she looks like a boy.

in the speech, pink recounted the story, saying: well what do you think i look like? and she said, well youre beautiful. and i was like, well, thanks. but when people make fun of me, thats what they use. they say i look like a boy or im too masculine or i have too many opinions, my body is too strong.

she went on to say: baby girl, we dont change. we take the gravel and the shell and we make a pearl. and we help other people to change so they can see more kinds of beauty.

in her latest video, for the single beautiful trauma, pink addresses traditional gender roles by appearing as stereotypical 50s style housewife with her husband, played by channing tatum. when she catches tatum dressed as a woman, she reacts with joy and the pair then dance with her in a suit and tie and him in a dress.

meanwhile, pink, whose real name is alecia moore, told the sun that she couldnt be a judge on the x factor, ahead of a performance on the uk version of the hit reality show.

the singer revealed in an interview with the sun that she is not suited to the job: would i be an x factor judge? nope. im not diplomatic and i wouldnt be helpful.

i would be so uncomfortable the whole time because i wouldnt want to be mean to anyone, but then i wouldnt want to bullsh-t anyone.

everyone who does it is so talented and nice  they can have it.

however, one person pink does has rude words for is us president donald trump, reports the sun.

earlier this week she tweeted that actor jeremy piven was more heavily punished for sexual misconduct allegations than the us president.

when asked about her political views, the star said: the world the way it is now is dicey, dicey. its crazy times.

every morning i wake up, throw my hands up in the air and im like, f-cking unbelievable, this is unbelievable.

whats my reaction to trump? simply f-cking unbelievable.

there is no good stuff with him, no good stuff at all. theres zero there. i just want this part over so we can get to the clean-up operation.

this article originally appeared on news.com.au.