trumps lawyer, john dowd, has been busy clearing out more brush, making the preposterous claim that the president cannot obstruct justice because hes the nations chief law enforcement officer. if trump shot somebody on fifth avenue  his own suggested redline  he could, as the nations chief law enforcement officer, tell the cops to quash the investigation.

see, when the president does it, its not a crime. this defense was floated during the two impeachment episodes of the 20th century. the third time will not be a charm. but trumps team already has gone from there is no collusion or obstruction to, so what? if it happened, its no biggie.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

they dont appear to be the least bit troubled by a stunning report from a whistle-blower. as trump was pledging to put america first during his inaugural address, his national security adviser, michael flynn, was texting a former business associate serving foreign clients. with trump in, the sanctions against russia would be ripped up, clearing the way for big money to be made on the inside, according to the report made public wednesday.

ignoring that story, trumps media wing is doing its job. sean hannity, at state-run television, went on a vein-popping rant tuesday against law enforcement, complete with conspiracy charts. he called the federal authorities a team of so-called investigators. as for their boss, he said that mueller is frankly a disgrace to the american justice system and has put the country on the brink of becoming a banana republic. hes certainly learned the art of projection from his master.

the wall street journal, channeling its owner and trump whisperer rupert murdoch, has been making much of the same case, albeit without the spittle.

dont forget, this is the same robert mueller who won wide bipartisan praise when he was appointed special counsel: a career prosecutor, the longest-serving director of the f.b.i. since j. edgar hoover, awarded the bronze star for his service as a marine in vietnam. republicans love him. or they did until he started closing in on trumps closest associates.

mueller should be fired, the russian enablers now claim, because one of his agents said some bad things about trump. this agent, peter strzok, was reassigned over the summer, as soon as his comments came to light. wow, a g-man has opinions. the cops i know, a couple of longstanding friends, have more opinions than i.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the facts are what matter. and the facts are pointing in a very bad direction for the gang that cant collude straight. trump has got to be sweating it; he was said to be seething when two of his campaign aides were indicted and a third pleaded guilty in october. he looked punch-drunk at recent public events.

now that hes a felon from a guilty plea last week, flynn is cooperating with mueller. he knows plenty. trump could pardon him and try to bring him back into the fold. the outrage would be minimal among the banana republicans. sure, they got their tax-relief-for-the-rich bill passed, so they may no longer need trump after he signs it. but now theyre dreaming of more  cutting medicare and health care for children, so they have a reason to keep him around.

if trump fires mueller, he can start the new year clean. his base will stick with him. though voters believe, by a nearly 2-1 margin, that russians interfered with the united states election, republicans do not. party before country  in the face of a dangerous turn toward authoritarianism, thats all that matters.