when kwasi boyd-bouldin and his family migrated to hollywood in 1980, they found a neighborhood of short brick apartment buildings, strip mall laundromats and liquor stores with bars on the windows and doors.

they had escaped from new york to california the romantic way, by train, three kids in their tweens and teens. they had fled brownsville, brooklyn, at a time the new york city was broke and dirty and crawling with mobsters.

change was necessary. also, kwasis father had moved to hollywood shortly after he was born. if they were going to have a relationship  and his mother wanted them to  they would have to live nearby. that this led them to the land of endless sun and countless movie stars made the move seem charmed, even magical.

mr. boyd-bouldin, now 40, grew up on the streets of a humble neighborhood in los angeles that would eventually go bad. it would even claim one of his sisters during the crack era. but he still loved hollywood. as a near-native, he rolled through the sun-bleached streets on his skateboard, taking in the scenery. he picked up his first camera, an olympus pen-f half-frame his dad left him, at 23, a trained observer of his cityscape. hed studied the alleys and avenues, the angles of buildings against the sky, like jane goodall studied lowland gorillas.

photo

these days, when he is not at his day job (as an education technology specialist at a pasadena art school), mr. boyd-bouldin, who is married and has two daughters, is haunting the streets of his youth. the los angeles recordings, his continuing documentary profile of his adopted hometown, serves as a visual introduction to his hollywood, as he likes to say, among other fond places.

he began the project two years ago in reaction to the head-turning physical changes in the landscape that gentrification brought to the city  the same story playing out in cities across the country, from seattle to philadelphia.

the los angeles recordings include photo essays from south of the 10 freeway, the liquor store, the displacement engine and other aspects of a city transforming faster than generations of working-class and lower-middle-class residents can handle.

there is no glitz here; no glamour peeking from behind the palm trees against the short, squat locksmith or the auto body shop.

in part, he says, the project is his intention to document a vanishing l.a. few who live outside it even know exists. he wants to present a portrait of the city that reflects the lives of people who live in los angeles, as opposed to the glossy fictional version that dominates the mainstream narrative.

people are just being priced out, and the speed in which it is happening is unbelievable, said mr. boyd-bouldin, who currently lives in toluca lake, a neighborhood near hollywood in the san fernando valley.

visually, he said, the landscape of the area is being transformed as well because many of the complexes being erected are so large they completely alter the skyline.

photo

most, if not all, of the complexes being built cater to the affluent, so they are unattainable to the people they are displacing.

for his hollywood portrait, the landscapes are stripped of clutter  for the most part, he leaves people out of the frame. in his hollywood, short, square cinder box buildings with signs for muffler repair, locksmiths, cobblers, and the iconic liquor store are recorded for posterity like the last of endangered species. he eschews the easy shot, the construction cranes behind the vacant lots where aging apartments once stood. mr. boyd-bouldins portrait is of an old familial hollywood that is here today but may be gone tomorrow. the sun-washed skies and lonely streets give some images a dreamy, faraway tone.

as he describes them: from an outside perspective, some may see only vacant lots and other signs of urban decay. but its important to take a more critical look at these areas.

what he is trying to do, he says, is to not only document the transformation but to provide insight into the impact these changes have had on the city. to what end, he is not sure. the los angeles recordings have no end in sight. i feel like i will always be documenting los angeles and hollywood in general, he said. its the city and place that made me who i am today.

follow @_kwasi_b and @nytimesphoto on twitter. kwasi boyd-bouldin is also on instagram. you can also find lens on facebook and instagram.