photo

west point, n.y.  like most army football players this time of year, ahmad bradshaw looks like someone has let the air out of him. hes at least 10 pounds lighter than the 205 he carried into the season. on saturdays, bradshaw, the black knights quarterback, triggers an option offense, an assignment that means he absorbs one punishing hit after another.

its the other six days a week, however, that really take a toll on him. the 6:30 a.m. formations. the 20 hours of classes, and the work for them that keeps bradshaw at the books long after taps echoes along the banks of the hudson river at 11:30 p.m. every night. there is also the year-round military training that beats him up: the bivouacking at nearby camp buckner, the weapons training, the historic campaigns and state-of-the-art military strategies crammed into the heads of bradshaw and his fellow cadets.

no, football hasnt shrunk bradshaw. he has found that to be the easiest, most fun and least important thing he has done during his 41 months as an officer in training.

to be clear, bradshaw has done football well. he has run for an army record 1,472 yards this season  a total that ranks 10th in the nation  and is 126 short of breaking the single-season mark by a service academy player set by navys napoleon mccallum in 1983. his team is 8-3 and leads the nation in rushing with an average of 368.1 yards a game. when army faces navy (6-5) for the 118th time on saturday in philadelphia, bradshaw and the black knights can return the commander-in-chiefs trophy here for the first time in 21 years.

advertisement continue reading the main story

but what is bradshaw most proud of as his college football career nears an end?

im proud im still here, he said. im proud that i was able to grow and adapt to west point. im a different person than when i first got here.

photo

at army, every cadet has to decide, after his or her sophomore year, whether to remain at west point. it is a momentous decision, one that can have profound consequences on a cadets life and career, and two years ago, faced with it, bradshaw almost walked away. in fact, he did not show for the commitment ceremony where cadets acknowledge that they want to be army officers and will honor their five-year postgraduate obligation to serve.