wordplay dividing line image a small blue marble, floating in space. credit nasa

wednesday puzzle  todays crossword by timothy polin has a lot going for it, not the least of which is that it serves as a handy reminder that the winter solstice is coming up in december.

other than that, the puzzle is a fun, midweek tug-of-war between our brains and the constructor and editors.

todays theme

did you think todays theme was a rebus? remember, ive told you that if you have difficulty filling in entries that you know are right, you should suspect a rebus element.

this can also happen with a dropped word theme, which is what we have today, among other theme elements. you might have had difficulty around the perimeter of the grid, and theres a reason for that: the full answer includes a directional word (north, east, south or west) that is dropped.

for example, at 1a, home to santas workshop is the north pole. we only have a four-letter slot, however, and the answer that fits is pole. how do we know its actually the north pole, other than being told this by all of the christmas music that is currently playing in every store we walk into? because its in the north perimeter of the grid. similarly, along the southern perimeter at 68a, lefties are southpaws, and we have to assume the word south and write in paws.

so what we have here is a kind of peripheral directional rose. i was impressed that mr. polin was able to make this work for every entry along the perimeter; its very elegant.

but wait, as a wise man once said, theres more. mr. polin stretches the equator across the center of his grid, and we can also find the tropics of cancer and capricorn in their appropriate places on this puzzle map.

tricky clues

15a: i had always heard the phrase as dumb as a bag of rocks, but today they are in a box.

37a: i was expecting the answer to what friday has, unlike any other day? to be an f, but an i is also correct.

21d: from the department of misparsers: b and e stands for breaking and entering.

34d: a debut for the sugar snap pea, which remains to this day the only green vegetable the boy will eat.

a very enjoyable wednesday outing, mr. polin.

your thoughts?