2. ex libris: the new york public library (frederick wiseman) in his wonderful, expansive and wholly absorbing documentary, mr. wiseman goes deep into the new york public library  down grand and humble halls, and past open and seeking faces  for a portrait of a cultural and social institution that is democracy incarnate.

3. faces places (agns varda and jr) in this glorious, vividly personal work, ms. varda both wanders through france and into the past alongside the visual artist jr, meeting new friends and seeking out old. ms. varda is often described as one of the greatest female directors alive, which is true. she is also one of the greatest.

photo

4. the florida project (sean baker) mr. baker makes heartbreakers about people usually ignored by movies: a porn actress and the forgotten elderly woman she befriends in starlet; two transgender female prostitutes in tangerine. in the florida project, he tells a deeply american story of children and adults struggling at the margins of disney world, creating a 21st-century grapes of wrath with psychedelic color and gobs of spit.

5. get out (jordan peele) a meme generator, a social critique and a metaphor for our times  get out is all of these. its also an exceptional feature directorial debut. mr. peele does much thats right and its worth remembering that what makes his movie memorable isnt only what he says, but also how he makes meaning cinematically with finely calibrated timing, a sense of alienated space and an indelibly haunted, haunting image of the void.

6. lady bird (greta gerwig) the anguished teenager has been a cinematic clich since james dean bellowed about being torn apart in rebel without a cause. ms. gerwigs tender, thrilling movie about an adolescent girl has plenty of drama: our heroine throws herself from a car. thereafter, she does more than simply survive; she becomes a person in a movie that insists female artistic self-creation isnt a matter of sacrifice but of being.

7. okja (bong joon-ho) filled with lapidary visual touches and pictorial splendor, mr. bongs lovely, often funny and achingly soulful movie about a girl and her pig didnt receive the theatrical release it deserved because it was bought by netflix, which largely seems committed to shoveling product into its pipeline. that may be the future, but its infuriating that  like the villain in this movie  it cant see past the bottom line.

8. phantom thread (paul thomas anderson) two lives  and two perversities  become one in this ravishingly beautiful, often unexpectedly funny film, which traces the relationship between an eminent couture designer (a magnificent daniel day-lewis) and his younger, surprising muse (vicky krieps). its a story about love and about work, and finally as much about its own creation as the romance onscreen.

photo

9. a quiet passion (terence davies) in this exquisitely directed biography of emily dickinson (a sensational cynthia nixon), mr. davies turns images into feelings. with delicacy and transporting camera movements, he brings you into emilys everyday life, touching close to the people that she deeply loved and into the rooms that they shared. he shows you the beauty, grace, light and shadow that flowed into her and right through her pen.

advertisement continue reading the main story

10. wonder woman (patty jenkins) i love all the movies on my list, but more than any other this year, wonder woman reminded me that we bring our entire histories when we watch a movie  our childhood reveries, our adolescent yearnings and adult reservations. ive always loved wonder woman in all her imperfection, including in the old tv show, and i loved her here because all my adult reservations were no match for this movie.

other favorites after the storm; the big sick; bombshell: the hedy lamarr story; call me by your name; the challenge; dawson city: frozen time; the death of louis xiv; escapes; girls trip; good time; the happiest day in the life of olli maki; i am not your negro; jim & andy: the great beyond  featuring a very special, contractually obligated mention of tony clifton; kedi; the lost city of z; mother!; mudbound; my journey through french cinema; norman: the moderate rise and tragic fall of a new york fixer; the ornithologist; patti cake$; personal shopper; the post; professor marston and the wonder women; quest; song to song; tonsler park; twin peaks: the return; the woman who left; wonderstruck.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

a.o. scott

there was a lot to feel bad about in 2017: plenty of reasons to take offense, get angry, go numb or feel sick to your stomach. if that sentence bummed you out, im sorry. (it was an epic year for dubious apologies, too.) but im not sorry about this list of the movies  a top 10 and a second 11  that made me feel other, better ways. not always cheerful, but enlightened, moved, surprised and gratified. in bad times, we tend to either ask too much or expect too little of art, pretending it might heal or save us, and dismissing it when it doesnt. its actual function is much simpler: it keeps us human. thats what these movies did for me this year.

1. the florida project

the promise of an independent, socially conscious, aesthetically adventurous homegrown cinema is spectacularly redeemed in sean bakers latest feature, which managed to be both the most joyful and the most heartbreaking movie of the year. steeped in the gaudy materialism of central florida, animated by brooklynn princes gleeful spontaneity and anchored by willem dafoes deep craft, the movie already has a feeling of permanence. ms. princes moonee has earned a place in the canon of american mischief alongside the likes of eloise and tom sawyer.

2. lady bird

in a high school production of shakespeare, christine mcpherson is cast as the tempest. its the titular role! says her once-and-future best friend  one of many odd, funny and perfectly apt lines in greta gerwigs sort-of-autobiographical coming-of-age story. in its titular role (christine prefers to be called lady bird), saoirse ronan is an utterly convincing american 17-year-old, and everyone else in her hectic world is just as sharply and sympathetically drawn. the films gentle, affirmative view of friendship, family life and adolescent sexuality is the opposite of sentimental.

3. get out

jordan peele wrote and directed the inescapable movie of 2017, a work of biting anti-consensus filmmaking that broke box office records. part of the films genius is the way it splinters the mythology of american racial healing and then reassembles the shards into something lacerating and beautiful. possibly conceived as a mordant punch line to the obama era, it may turn out to be the inaugural blast of insurgent cinema in the age of trump.

photo

4. i am not your negro

raoul pecks documentary uses james baldwins words to paint a portrait not only of the writer in his time, but also of the ideas that stretch beyond his work into our own troubled moment. baldwin wrote about american racism  about the lethal and insidious power of whiteness to distort the nations ideals and threaten its humanity  with unequaled vigor, humor and insight. the movie is painful because the truth is painful.

5. faces places

but the truth can also be delightful. which isnt to say that strong, bitter emotions dont have a place in the latest auto-documentary by agns varda. in her late 80s, accompanied by a thirtyish artist named jr (who is also credited as director), ms. varda roams the french countryside, searching out the remnants of a once-vibrant working-class tradition. contemplating some of the sorrows in her own past and the precariousness of the european present, she keeps gloom at bay with her resilient faith in the power of art to conserve and expand human dignity. every second of this movie proves her right.

advertisement continue reading the main story

6. phantom thread

there are movies that satisfy the hunger for relevance, the need to see the urgent issues of the day reflected on screen. paul thomas andersons eighth feature  which may also be daniel day-lewiss last movie  is emphatically and sublimely not one of them. it awakens other appetites, longings that are too often neglected: for beauty, for strangeness, for the delirious, heedless pursuit of perfection. ive only seen this film once (it opens at christmastime), and im sure it has its flaws. i will happily watch it another dozen times until i find them all.

7. a fantastic woman

sebastin lelios portrait of marina, a transgender woman mourning the death of her lover and facing the hostility of his family, is at once bluntly realistic and ripely melodramatic, polemical and poetic, pointed and, well, fantastical. daniela vega, who plays marina, doesnt show up on screen right away, but once she does (singing a torch song in a nightclub in santiago, chile), the camera never leaves her for long. what it finds in the planes of her face is some of the glamour of old-time movie stars  hints of greta garbo, joan crawford, anna magnani and lauren bacall  and even more of the emotional authenticity that made them stars in the first place.

photo

8. graduation

the kid-goes-to-college movie has emerged as a minor american genre. this years examples include lady bird, the meyerowitz stories (new and selected) and brads status, all of which offer gently comical perspectives on a familiar rite of passage. cristian mungiu, the romanian director of 4 months, 3 weeks and 2 days and beyond the hills, offers a grimmer view. a provincial doctor wants his daughter to attend university in england, and is willing to compromise his ideals to ensure that she can. a family drama and an ethical thriller, mr. mungius film is an indictment of the everyday corruption that festers not only in romania, but everywhere selfishness has become the supreme social value.

9. a quiet passion

but not so quiet, really. as emily dickinson, cynthia nixon is forthright, sometimes abrasive, often funny and never less than thrilling company. terence daviess blithely unconventional biopic glides through dickinsons life with poetic compression and musical grace, illuminating both her temperament and the austere, intellectually intense 19th-century new england environment that nurtured and constrained her gifts.

photo

10. war for the planet of the apes

never has human extinction seemed so richly merited, and rarely has digital ingenuity been put to such sublime use. the third installment in the revived series is an epic of national founding, with echoes of the aeneid and the book of exodus. somber and exciting, the film, directed by matt reeves, shows how large-scale action filmmaking can explore political and moral matters without bogging down in pretentiousness. andy serkis remains the key to the enterprise. his performance as caesar, spanning three movies, is one of the great feats of acting in modern movies, a breathtaking fusion of technological magic and solid thespian craft.

and also (in alphabetical order): the bad batch; bpm (beats per minute); call me by your name; dawson city: frozen time; i called him morgan; logan lucky; the meyerowitz stories (new and selected); mudbound; okja; the post; the shape of water.