photo

a lot of good, honorable republicans used to believe there was a safe middle ground. you didnt have to tie yourself hip to hip with donald trump, but you didnt have to go all the way to the other extreme and commit political suicide like the dissident jeff flake, either. you could sort of float along in the middle, and keep your head down until this whole trump thing passed.

now its clear that middle ground doesnt exist. thats because donald trump never stops asking. first, he asked the party to swallow the idea of a narcissistic sexual harasser and a routine liar as its party leader. then he asked the party to accept his comprehensive ignorance and his politics of racial division. now he asks the party to give up its reputation for fiscal conservatism. at the same time he asks the party to become the party of roy moore, the party of bigotry, alleged sexual harassment and child assault.

there is no end to what trump will ask of his party. he is defined by shamelessness, and so there is no bottom. and apparently there is no end to what regular republicans are willing to give him. trump may soon ask them to accept his firing of robert mueller, and yes, after some sighing, they will accept that, too.

thats the way these corrupt bargains always work. you think youre only giving your tormentor a little piece of yourself, but he keeps asking and asking, and before long he owns your entire soul.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the republican party is doing harm to every cause it purports to serve. if republicans accept roy moore as a united states senator, they may, for a couple years, have one more vote for a justice or a tax cut, but they will have made their party loathsome for an entire generation. the pro-life cause will be forever associated with moral hypocrisy on an epic scale. the word evangelical is already being discredited for an entire generation. young people and people of color look at the trump-moore g.o.p. and they are repulsed, maybe forever.