their friendship began entirely at random when words with friends, a scrabble-like phone game, assigned the two strangers to play each other last summer. they would eventually play hundreds of games together.

at first it was all business. in the earliest games they didnt use the apps chat function, which is often used for banter about the game. but soon they began discussing current events and the details of their lives, including his plans to move from silver spring, md., to new york to chase his dreams of a music career.

they played almost every day. each time there would be just regular, everyday chatting, he said. but the demands of life would eventually interfere, and he couldnt find time to keep up with their games.

he decided to delete the app, but made sure to say goodbye to ms. guttman first. before he left, he asked her if she had any advice.

photo

whatever you want out of life, just go grab it, she said.

in october, a few months after moving to new york, he decided to reinstall the game, and immediately reconnected with ms. guttman, he said. but he had no plans to meet her until amy butler, the mother of one of his friends, overheard him talking about his online pal.

advertisement continue reading the main story

ms. butler, senior minister at riverside church in manhattan, wanted to tell the story of their friendship, so she asked if he would put her in touch with ms. guttman. after the women talked on the phone, ms. butler decided an in-person meeting would really finish the story off, she said.

so she and mr. sleyon flew down to florida on friday, and it was more beautiful than i could have even imagined, she said.

there was no hint of awkwardness, she said. it was like they were magnetically drawn to each other.

photo

they didnt have much time  just a lunch and a quick tour of palm beach  but the photos he tweeted afterward attracted widespread attention, including from the news media. mr. sleyon said he was thrilled his story had touched so many people.

a lot of people i saw online said, i needed a story like this, especially with the race relations in this country right now, he said.

ms. guttman has not spoken to reporters. according to ms. butler, ms. guttman doesnt know what all the fuss is about, since people should be behaving this way with each other all the time.

but she did send ms. butler an email soon after they left for new york. ms. butler read the email during her sermon at the church on sunday.