65a: executive producer? = wharton. university of pennsylvanias business school can be said to produce executives.

i loved this theme. perhaps a bit tough for a tuesday, but an occasional challenge is always nice. after all, we do crosswords to stretch our brains, and the reinterpretation of phrases like these has us doing just that. hat tips are in order for mr. smith and ms. burnikel.

tricky clues

32a: the buds in the clue they come with buds had me thinking about flowers and friends first. however, the correct answer is ipods, which come with earbuds.

39a: occasionally, some clue-answer combinations are tough from the answers themselves, even though the clue is quite descriptive. sad day didnt come to mind immediately, though how else could it have been clued for a tuesday audience? this is its second appearance in the times.

5d: a times debut that surprised me, as i filled it right in the grid without crossers. were you familiar with sue bee?

23d: i had no idea what cane blades were, but this is a great example of where pattern recognition is just as valuable as an expansive trivia background. lets say you saw this clue, and only knew that the answer was o _ _ e. how many other musical instruments do you know that follow this letter pattern? you should be able to tentatively fill in oboe and then check your crossers; perhaps guessing on that second o will help you figure out orb at 33a.

25d: hot mics can cause trouble by allowing people to hear comments that you didnt intend to make publicly. mics are short for microphones.

advertisement continue reading the main story

57d: you always have to be careful in deciding between aah and ahh. here, even if you were unfamiliar with 62a, oh henry looks much more plausible than oahenry.

constructor notes

harry smith: late last winter, nbc news producer kori lynch wanted to know if i had any interest in doing a story on will shortz and the 75th anniversary of the times crossword. as a fan, i could not pass up the opportunity. we covered the big puzzle competition in connecticut which will started and still runs. [this is the american crossword puzzle tournament. see you there in a few months? s.e.] and eventually made it to his home for the big interview. the place is a riot. there are stacks of ancient newspapers. piles of puzzle books. artifacts and ephemera from his lifetime as a enigmatologist. and then there are the submissions. hundreds of envelopes from around the country. each with a puzzle inside. all waiting for will to determine if they are worthy of the paper. as our interview was concluding, will asked me if i wanted to take a crack at creating an anniversary crossword for the times. i panicked. the puzzle is a mirthful meditation. a secular, sacred safe space where the rest of the world does not encroach. i eventually said yes. and soon realized my panic was unfounded. will put me in touch with zhouqin burnikel and we quickly set to work. first she said will would want three themes. and so began a flurry of phone calls and email messages  a weekends worth, in fact. id propose something and zhouqin instantly knew if it worked or did not. nose for gnus did not. the process was a blast. it was raw wordplay, simultaneously exhilarating and gleefully frustrating. when zhouqin was satisfied with the themes, we sent them off to will. will sent back his thoughts and zhouqin set out to build the rest of the grid. at which point she sent it to me and assigned me to write the rest of the clues. it honestly saddened me to complete the puzzle. the process was that much fun. so a big thank you to will and zhouqin. it has been an honor to be asked to do this. a highlight of the year without question. and for the record: my wife, nbc sportscaster andrea joyce, is the truly devoted puzzle person in our household. as the puzzles get harder through the week, she routinely leaves me in the dust. zhouqin burnikel: this puzzle was made last april. immediately after will introduced us, harry sent me a few ideas. we eventually settled on todays theme set, with wills help. harry was so warm, quick and creative. i was also surprised that he speaks some chinese. he knows pijiu (beer), mei wen ti (no problem), etc. its such an honor to work with a news legend.

congratulations on your debut, mr. smith! thanks to both you and ms. burnikel for a memorable tuesday offering.

solvers, ill leave you with a song from one of my favorite bands, that quotes the opening lines of allen ginsbergs howl:

your thoughts?