the coopers plains location of sendok garpu is still in operation, and it is one of those food discoveries that is so unexpected it feels like pure magic. to find it, you drive down a suburban side street and turn into an unmarked collection of buildings. the industrial park has rebounded somewhat since the floods, but on the weekend the area is deserted except for the white tents of ms. martinos food stall in the center of the block. there, families gather at plastic tables to eat plates of west sumatran-style mixed rice with cabbage, searingly spicy beef rendang, and green beans cooked in fragrant yellow curry.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story subscribe to the australia letter newsletter damien cave, our new australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

in 2014, after attracting a cult following through the weekend stall and appearances at food festivals, ms. martino opened the full-time dinner operation in indooroopilly. the food in coopers plains is homey and comforting, but the indooroopilly restaurant serves specialties from all over indonesia  dishes more likely to be found at festivals and celebrations. the menu is six pages, but if you have only ever eaten in bali, one of the most popular tourist destinations for australians, there will be much that is unfamiliar. the island is the only part of indonesia with a majority hindu population. (the nation is predominantly muslim.) there is no pork on this menu, and no booze  though you are welcome to bring your own.

to start, there are impossibly light and crisp corn cakes, served with peanut dipping sauce, like those sold from street stalls in north sulawesi. martabak telur presents beef with egg and shallot, wrapped in crepes and fried to a shattery crisp. on the wok station section of the menu you can find multiple iterations of nasi goreng  the fried rice considered by many to be indonesias national dish  including versions made with wide, sticky egg noodles or vermicelli. the kitchen does not hold back, and there is a hefty dose of funk and spice in each version. most tables have a bowl of cooling peanut-dressed gado gado salad on hand as salve for the heat.

even if the spice and pungency thrill you, there are things at sendok garpu that might be less appealing to a non-indonesian palate. fried items are fried hard  catfish is so crispy it is difficult to pry from its skeleton. some short-rib dishes are cooked to a meaty stew, while others are fried to a suspended state of hot oily crackle, like beef chicharrn with bones.

many dishes come with one of three house-made sambals: one sweet with green chile, one pungent with fermented shrimp, the last bright with garlic  all of them intensely spicy. it is worth ordering a side of each with your meal, to add to rice and stir-fry dishes. they showcase the same deft complexity that appears in the restaurants curries. the lamb curry in particular (ms. martino attributes the recipe to her father) is musky and rich and irresistibly sweat-inducing.

at both locations, ms. martino is telling the story of her country. the cultural exchange between australia and indonesia has mainly gone one way: australian tourists vacation in bali. sendok garpu offers a wonderful taste of what is possible when that exchange goes the other way, when an expat communitys yearning for a taste of home makes all of our lives more delicious.

do you have a suggestion for besha rodell? the new york timess australia bureau would love to hear from you: nytaustralia@nytimes.com or join the discussion in the nyt australia facebook group. read about the australia fare column here.

advertisement continue reading the main story

follow nyt food on facebook, instagram, twitter and pinterest. get regular updates from nyt cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.