photo

several days ago two sisters, anna zuccaro, 26, and mia merrill, 30, began an online petition asking the metropolitan museum of art to remove, or at least reimagine, the way that it presented a painting, thrse dreaming, of a young girl in languorous, erotic recline.

the artist, balthasar klossowsi de rola, or balthus, had used the model, thrse blanchard, the daughter of a neighboring parisian restaurant worker, over the course of three years, making 10 paintings of her beginning in 1936, when she was 11. the image in question features her at 12 or 13, with her legs bent and slightly apart, her eyes closed, her thoughts seemingly lost to fantasy. her skirt is hiked up to reveal a red lining and a pair of white cotton underwear. writing about a balthus exhibit at the met, four years ago, the art critic peter schjeldahl remarked, looking at the paintings, i kept thinking of a line by oscar wilde: a bad man is the sort of man who admires innocence.

on the face of it the petition, which quickly gained more than 10,000 signatures, seems like a parody of millennial agitation over the need for cultural protections. when i went to the metropolitan museum of art this past weekend, ms. merrill begins her call for support, i was shocked to see a painting that depicts a young girl in a sexually suggestive pose. that is an unlikely reaction for a former art history student at new york university who is involved in feminist causes. but the initial provocation gives way to an utterly reasonable demand, not for censorship or destruction or an idle trigger warning to shield the fragile from being discomfited, but rather for some provision of context, in the form of expanded text for instance, around a work of art that is rooted in the kind of sexualized power abuses we are now so aggressively trying to dismantle.

those who take issue with the need for these sorts of descriptions argue that we would then be left annotating much of the history of western art, a position that ignores the crucial distinction between art that imagines or documents exploitation and art that is actively engaged in producing it. balthus, who died 16 years ago in his 90s, had a longstanding obsession with girls in the early years of their adolescence, whom he often featured nude, in repose, or asleep. the golden days portrays a 14-year-old model, odile bugnon, in a short skirt, her legs spread across a divan as a shirtless man tends to a fire beside her.

photo

a few years ago the gagosian gallery in new york held a show of some of the polaroids balthus had taken at the end of his life, of a young girl named anna wahli, who was usually semi-dressed when he photographed her. she sat for him one afternoon a week from the time she was 8 until she was a teenager. after the sessions, they would watch the soap opera the bold and the beautiful. a german museum had canceled an exhibition of the images previously, with a newspaper calling them documents of pedophilic greed.

advertisement continue reading the main story

at the end of the day, were talking about an artist who asked very young girls to come to his studio and take their clothes off, ms. merrill said. in some instances, she pointed out, he painted the daughters of his servants. what does that do to the question of consent?