special post  some solvers love them, some solvers hate them, but rebus elements are a fact of life when it comes to solving crosswords.

readers who are just starting to solve ask two questions when there is a rebus in a puzzle: they ask if they are supposed to be warned that a rebus exists in the puzzle (no, thats part of the fun of solving) and they ask how in tarnation they are supposed to put more than one letter in a square if they are solving electronically. ill get to that in a minute, but first id like to show you what a rebus in a crossword looks like.

a rebus can be a letter, number or symbol that represents a word, but in many crosswords, the rebus will be a word or group of letters that need to be written inside a single square, like this puzzle by elizabeth long from december 1, 2011, where the word jack was the rebus element.

photo

the clue was you might find one at a sawmill, and the answer is lumberjack, a 10 letter word, but the slot only has room for seven letters. how do you fill in the entire answer?

entering a rebus on the web

step 1: select the square in which you want to enter a rebus. click the rebus button on the toolbar above the clue lists, or simply press escape (esc). this will open an expandable square in which you can type multiple characters. step 2: type in your answer and press enter/return, or click anywhere outside the field to close and save your rebus. to cancel your entry instead, press escape.

photo

entering a rebus on an ios device

step 1: click on the square in which you want to enter the rebus. tap the more key on the bottom left-hand side of the screen. step 2: tap the rebus key. this will open up a larger square in which you can type multiple letters. step 3: type in the letters and then tap anywhere inside the grid to close and save your rebus.

photo

entering a rebus on an android device

the process for entering a rebus on an android device is the same as for the ios process, except that on the android app, the ellipsis key [ ... ] on the lower left-hand side is used. tap the ellipsis key and then locate the rebus key. follow the instructions for entering the rebus element on an ios device.

now that you have the hang of this crossword feature, give one of our free mini puzzles a try.

happy solving!