few parents have the time to assess every app their child wants to download on these criteria, but they can follow some general guidelines. after skimming an apps ratings and searching for reviews and forum discussions, consider these tips.

who made the app?

as always, consider the source. sometimes thats easy if the name is familiar, said david hill, chair of american academy of pediatrics council on communications and media.

some of the very best educational technology comes from pbs kids, and this should surprise no one, dr. hill said. it was pbs that pioneered the whole concept of educational media with the research-backed benefits of sesame street.

but a name isnt everything  not all disney and nickelodeon apps are educational  and sticking only with familiar brands may leave out exciting up-and-comers. so parents can also look at the companys values and whether educators were involved in the apps development.

if an app is created in conjunction with educators, thats a really good sign, said christine elgersma, senior editor of parent education at common sense media, a nonprofit that reviews apps, films, tv shows, video games and related media for kids. with educators, you have a much better chance of having and achieving learning objectives.

and if you find an app you and your child really like, see if the developer has others. tinybop, for example, has a suite of excellent educational apps available individually or in discounted packages.

trust the experts

common sense media is one of parents best resources for investigating apps. ms. elgersma described some of the criteria they consider: first, is it fun? is a kid actually going to want to use this particular app? is it empowering for the kid in some way? is it more of an active or passive experience? can they transfer learning to real life in some way? is it adaptive? if a kid is using it and they get some answers wrong, does the app adapt to that experience?

advertisement continue reading the main story

apps intended to be educational should have clearly stated evidence-based learning objectives.

if a developer makes a big claim about what kids can learn, but theres no research to back it up and there are no educators involved in the creation of the app, thats a red flag, ms. elgersma said. steer clear of apps claiming to teach language to babies and toddlers, for example. research clearly shows that kids learn language primarily from caregivers during social interactions, and screens cant trump real, human conversations.

childrens technology review, or ctrex, is another resource.

not only do they provide reviews from someone with a pedagogical background, but they provide videos of the app, how educational and entertaining it might be and some of the bugs in it, said dr. jessica taylor piotrowski, director of the center for research on children, adolescents and the media at the university of amsterdam in the netherlands. you can see everything from the price point to the recommended ages to key features it has. ctrex is a paid subscription but may be worth it for parents sifting through dozens of new apps each year.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the smarter living newsletter a weekly roundup of the best advice from the times on living a better, smarter, more fulfilling life. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

teachers and fellow parents are experts too, and are likely willing to offer their own suggestions. in my network, parents recommended raz-kids, dragonbox, starfall, bedtime math, ixl apps, scribblenauts, endless alphabet, spelling city, tumblebooks, epic!, and abc mouse.

does the app have advertising or in-app purchases?

some free apps really are no-strings-attached, such as those from pbs. more often, the money to develop and maintain a free app comes from advertising or in-app purchases. poptropica is a fun educational-ish app, dr. hill said, but its supported by ads and can seem like one long advertisement for kellogg brand cereals, he said. its fun. its interesting. but you may not want that advertising with it, he said.

look for whether the app offers extras to buy in the app and how easy it is to do. most phones let parents change the settings to require a password for purchases, so kids dont go crazy with your credit card. some developers offer freemium apps, which let users download a lite version of an app to try it out before paying for the full-featured version.

does the app protect your childs privacy?

some apps may ask a childs name or age to personalize it or ensure the user is old enough, but parents should be wary of apps asking for too much information. apps designed for children underage 13 should be compliant with the childrens online privacy protection rule, known as coppa, ms. elgersma said.

if it says theyre coppa-compliant in the app description, it means theyre paying attention and trying to fall within those guidelines, she said. if it says it for people over 13, its not coppa-compliant and they can collect any data they want.

but theres a double-edged sword: in social apps, complete anonymity can open the door to bullying if kids dont feel accountable for their words. ms. elgersma recommends checking to be sure kids can easily report abuse in social apps. roblox, for example, has multiple safeguards for kids, she said.

advertisement continue reading the main story

does the app seem right for your child in particular?

no one knows your child better than you, so trust your gut.

it comes down to watching your child play and seeing if its meeting their needs, including having fun, dr. piotrowski said. sometimes we unintentionally think that if it is enjoyable, theyre not learning, but the more they enjoy it, the more they engage with it, the more sustained play we have and the greater chance we have for learning, she said.

that includes games not explicitly designed as educational. minecraft involves problem-solving and spatial skills. pokmon go requires basic math, introduces players to local landmarks and history and emphasizes different habitats of different creatures  even imaginary ones. (both of those have in-app purchases.) monument valley and the room are fun puzzle apps that engage spatial and critical thinking skills.

parents rarely feel guilty if their child spends 20 minutes having fun on the playground, and they shouldnt feel guilty about 20 minutes of fun on an app either, dr. piotrowski said. some apps aim for deep learning; others aim for play.

when an app is well-designed, with a clear goal to support a skill and clear target audience, and really relies on these principles of being active, engaged, meaningful and socially interactive, they work, they absolutely work, dr. piotrowski said. but some of these apps are playful experiences that enable creativity and problem-solving, and they can be just as valuable.

does the app do something only an app can do?

kids dont need an app with flashcards or work sheets. good apps should bring to life an experience thats impossible to create off screen, ms. elgersma said. thats the kind of app that can be really exciting for kids and provide really unique learning opportunities. examples include the tinybop apps, such as the earth, robot factory, space, skyscrapers and the human body. kids can explore those topics in a way that a book doesnt let them, she said. they can go inside the human body and explore how body parts work.

another reading and literacy app, homer, includes a safe social component which allows kids to send their creations and progress to approved family members and educators. that offers them a way to interact and take some ownership and agency around what theyre learning, ms. elgersma said.

balance, balance, balance: everything in moderation

how much time on mobile devices is too much? there are no hard and fast rules, dr. wartella said.

its a question of balance over the course of the day, she said. she recommends having technology-free zones, such as mealtimes and bedtime, and notes that parents use of technology should model whats appropriate for kids.

the american academy of pediatrics offers a personalized family media use planning tool at healthychildren.org, dr. hill said, but the principle is pretty simple: media use needs to fit in around all the other things that are important for childhood wellness, he said, including eating, sleeping, physical activity, homework, reading and social interactions.

you cant beat em, so join em

some early evidence suggests two people using a tablet together might offer more benefits than solo use, dr. wartella said, but not much research exists on co-use yet. still, using it together means parents can ensure they are comfortable with the app, and they can discuss it with their child as they might discuss a book.

advertisement continue reading the main story

a parent can really be a bridge to transfer any learning an app has to the real world so its not isolated to a screen when that tablet cover is closed, ms. elgersma said. co-use and co-play  that is one of the most powerful ways that apps can be educational.