photo

friday puzzle  before we talk about todays puzzle, i am very proud to present how to solve the new york times crossword, a new guide to help beginning solvers and those who want to improve their skills get their solve on. packed with mini crosswords by the alarmingly intrepid sam ezersky, our guide lets solvers in on the secrets behind reading those tricky clues, talks about why some crosswords have themes and even includes a crosswordese quiz, so you can brush up on those obscure entries that pop up now and again. we hope you enjoy it, and that you will share it with those who would like to learn to solve.

a very worthy, second new york times crossword outing from lily silverstein, with a central seed entry that will no doubt provoke some discussion. but thats what were here for, isnt it?

for those of you just joining us, a seed entry is a word or phrase that a constructor believes will make a lively start to the fill in a puzzle. the rest of the fill is built around it, and the seed entry typically gets a prominent place in the grid.

todays seed entry, according to ms. silverstein, is the central entry gender roles, clued as parts played on classic sitcoms? some solvers might discuss the entry because of the evolving nature of gender roles in society, but personally, i was more curious about the question mark at the end of the clue. it seemed to me that the clue would work just as well without a ? but that was only on my first reading.

advertisement continue reading the main story

a ? at the end of a clue typically means the clue cannot be taken at face value. it also means a clue is stretching beyond a single reality: today, were not talking about literal roles or parts being played, but the fact that in old or classic sitcoms, people usually adhered to then-stereotypical gender roles, like the stay-at-home mom who raised the children or the beleaguered dad who worked outside the home. in an email, editor will shortz also remarked that a secondary reason is the clues inexactness. it might not always be true. a question mark in a clue sometimes substitutes for maybe or perhaps.