now, can you guess the two-word exclamation? heres the answer, but no peeking unless youve given up.

tricky clues

20a: as a foodie, my knowledge of the word sop extends to sopping up sauce with a piece of bread, but it can also be a conciliatory gesture.

27a: a bluejacket is a nickname for an enlisted sailor in the united states or royal navy, and tar is a synonym.

37a: the old article in a newspaper trick. the word der in german means the, which is an article in terms of parts of speech. the clue essen article is meant to make solvers think of an article in a german newspaper.

40a: i had ray gun before ion gun.

56a: more wordplay! sign of summer sounds like it might be talking about the longer daylight hours, or perhaps the warm weather, but in todays puzzle, the word sign is meant to mean a zodiac sign. leo the lion is a summer birth sign.

39d: dont curse at the altar. place where one is encouraged to swear? is not primal scream therapy, although thats a good guess. you take vows at the altar, which is a type of swearing.

constructor notes

my mother, ilse, was a native german-speaker who, after fleeing her native land in the 30s, settled in england and studied french in college. my father, walter, also born in germany, escaped to palestine, where he spoke hebrew by day and studied english by night. they met in england, then emigrated to the united states to marry. language was consequential in our house: my parents linguistic capabilities were inescapably intertwined with their personal histories. and english, especially, represented values they revered  the stiff upper lip of england, and the opportunity to succeed through ones efforts that the united states offered. they spoke and wrote an english that was not only elegant, but precise: they had too much respect for their adopted tongue to make a grammatical error or to use vague terminology. they were serious about language, except when they werent. dad was a reliable source of terrible puns for every occasion; and both he and mom loved comedy based on wordplay. my siblings and i grew up playing scrabble and other word games with our parents and each other. we recognized early on that words could be fun.

photo