5 cheap(ish) things to help you have a very hygge winter image

welcome to the smarter living newsletter. the smarter living team emails readers once a week with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. sign up here to get it in your inbox every monday morning.

hi everyone! im michelle l. dozois, a friend of smarter living, and this week the editor, tim herrera, has invited to me to talk about one of my favorite topics: hygge.

hygge (pronounced hoo-gah) is the danish concept of coziness. if youre not familiar, heres a crash course, and if you want to dive in further (you will, and you should), here are some books to check out.

winter is the most hygge season  you can be hygge in summer, but its much easier to achieve when its cold outside  and my favorite hygge tradition is to seek out new york citys best mulled wine. (i recommend the grey dogs.)

however, hygge is best enjoyed at home, since you can maximize the hygge-ness of your surroundings. for that, i love instant gourmet crown mulling spices. its also great to bring to holiday parties, if your hosts have space on their stove for you to set up shop.

in collaboration with wirecutter, a new york times company that reviews and recommends products, here are four other cheap(ish) items to help you have a hygge winter.

slippers

this winter, im on a quest to see how many faux-fur items i can wear at once, partly inspired by this essay on why you should buy a silly winter coat.

when youre settling in for a hygge evening, everything youre wearing should be comfortable. theres even a term for your pants that are oh-so-comfortable but shouldnt be seen in public: hyggebukser. slippers are the exclamation point on your hyggebukser.

the best slippers are fuzzy and warm without making your feet sweaty and are easy to slip on and off without using your hands, which are, of course, busy being warmed by your mug of mulled wine.

wirecutters pick, l.l. beans wicked good moccasins, checks off all those boxes.

dutch oven

comfort food is a hygge must. unfortunately, im no cook  my halfhearted attempts at preparing dinner all inevitably end up affectionately being referred to as gruel by my husband, who is a much better cook.

its a resolution of mine to fix that in 2018, so someday ill put my dutch oven to better use by cooking hearty stews, serving up decadent mac and cheese, and maybe even attempting to replicate my mother-in-laws knoephla soup recipe. (its a north dakota thing.)

wirecutters pick is the 6-quart lodge color enamel dutch oven.

miniature lights

lighting is an integral part of hygge. according to the little book of hygge, 85 percent of danes mention candles when asked what they most associate with hygge.

im here to make the case for indoor miniature lights, too. tiny, warm white lights add a glow that magnifies that hygge vibe. line your mantle or bookshelves, and dont store them away until at least february (please unplug when unattended, friends). its not lazy. its hygge!

wirecutters pick is ges energy smart colorite led miniature lights.

dog bed

for me, peak hygge is curling up on my couch with my hyggebukser, slippers and mulled wine as my dog, zuki, rests in my lap or on my leg. she is kind of a hygge expert.

but dogs need their own hygge spot, too. if you have a four-legged friend keeping you company, think about getting the majestic pet products suede bagel dog bed, wirecutters favorite dog bed for most pooches.

what hygge things are you looking forward to this winter? let me know at mitch@nytimes.com and put hygge in the subject line, or tweet me at @michelledozois.

 michelle

best of smarter living

how to build a successful team building a successful team is about more than finding a group of people with the right mix of professional skills.

your liver doesnt know its the holidays think of your liver as the unindulgent relative at your holiday party who doesnt like the change in schedule and would rather be in bed.

5 easy, breezy skin care tips for guys this winter dont let the cold weather dry out your skin. here are a few simple ways to maintain a good complexion.

how to choose the best apps for your kids educational tech is still a new field, but parents dont have to be lost when their kids come asking them to install something new.

why trying new things is so hard to do most people make relatively few personal experiments, in both small and big things. the cost of passivity is enormous.

how to beat the line and get reservations at hot new restaurants when an establishment opens in town and everyones lining up for a taste, heres how you can score a seat  the smart and easy way.

what were reading

 stop leaving your money in these dumb places.

 create a mini-crisis and 26 other productivity tips for next year.

 words to turn a conversation around (and those to avoid).

 how to keep your kids off your bed.

 nothings really hard. youre just stubborn.