photo

caviar and truffles are all well and good, but nothing says im pampering my guests quite like a tray of hot, crisp gougres straight from the oven.

it isnt because these french cheese puffs are expensive to make. theyre not. a humble mix of grated cheese, butter and flour, theyre among the thriftiest tidbits on the hors doeuvres circuit. nor are they difficult  though if you dont have an electric mixer, some muscle will be required to beat the eggs into the stiff batter.

photo

but theres a certain amount of planning needed both in terms of timing and oven space to serve them while theyre still piping hot  or at least still very warm. thats when their buttery, cheesy charm is at its most pronounced. putting this kind of planning into action amid the swirling chaotic bustle of the average holiday cocktail party (at least, my average holiday cocktail party) is what i mean by pampering, albeit in an understated way.

the upside of serving gougres at a party is that you can make them ahead and freeze them before baking. then, as your guests are unwrapping themselves from scarves and hats and winter coats, simply pop them, frozen, into the oven. by the time the drinks are poured, youll be able to pass around a steaming tray for immediate nibbling.

photo

plain gougres are wonderful, but the cheese puffs also take well to variations. you can change up the cheeses, as long as you always sprinkle some extra on top to bake up into a salty brown crust. chiles, cracked pepper or spices add verve. whole-wheat or rye flour reduces the puffiness slightly, but adds a lovely earthy, nutty flavor. or, you can add intensely flavored, minced bits like herbs, garlic, capers and olives. here, i use a combination of crisp pancetta and sage, but basil and olives would be lovely if youre going for something vaguely provenal. and so on.

if you can work fast or find a helper, you can fill your gougres with all kinds of tasty mixes. slice them open while theyre still hot enough to burn your fingers, and spoon or pipe in the likes of smoked fish mousse, pimento cheese, dollops of chicken, or lobster salad. or try filling them with a spoonful of crme frache topped by an even larger one of caviar  and pamper your guests to the extreme.

recipes: gougres with pancetta and sage | classic gougres

follow nyt food on facebook, instagram, twitter and pinterest. get regular updates from nyt cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.