it was, by and large, a success. essentially a progressive community center, it built its programming around the talents of the jungles transient population. on any given day, it might host theater workshops from the two joes, kung fu lessons from the iranian master who was a fixture for a few months, and all manner of dance, circus and live music performances  some from the band mr. sarrar had assembled shortly after arriving. it was empowering, entertaining and a rare melting pot for the camps myriad nationalities. (it also attracted negative coverage in the british tabloids, notably a daily express article that described it as a nightclub, where migrants dance the night away.)

but even with the ameliorating factors of music and camaraderie, the jungle was no idyllic setting.

it certainly wasnt pleasurable for mr. sarrar; he said that he tried to leave every night. but he played in his band, wrote some songs  he is particularly proud of an upbeat number recounting an absurd 24 hours he spent trapped in the eurostar terminal in calais  and made some contacts. one night, his own good chance came: he stowed away in a truck and made it through to birmingham, england, where he claimed asylum. six months later, he was granted leave to remain for five years, with the possibility of extension.

advertisement continue reading the main story

mr. murphy and mr. robertson remained in calais, where the situation was rapidly deteriorating. the cold was awful, mr. robertson said. the sanitation was awful, the police gradually became more aggressive and the unaccompanied kids started to go, well, mad. the mental health really got awful.

good chance lasted until march 2016, when a section of the camp was forcibly cleared by french authorities. the rest of the jungle was bulldozed in october 2016.

photo

today good chance is the name of a charity, which continues to work with migrants in paris. but mr. murphy and mr. robertson, its artistic directors, are still playwrights. they are associates of londons young vic. and they were invited to write a show about their experiences by rufus norris, the artistic director of the national theater.

the result is the jungle, an ambitious, questioning play that follows a year in the life of the camp and is scheduled to run at the young vic through jan. 9.

the duo assembled a cast that features three former camp residents, one of whom is mr. sarrar, who had moved to northern england after being granted asylum and then reconnected with the duo at a workshop in manchester. now smartly dressed, with a natty blond streak in his hair and a decent grasp of english, he plays a drum-toting refugee named omar.

produced by the national theater and the young vic, the jungle is directed by stephen daldry, alongside justin martin (a second unit director on mr. daldrys netflix show the crown).

rehearsal are freewheeling, lively and tinged with chaos. on a recent afternoon, the scenes being played out involved the actions of good-intentioned western volunteers resulting in borderline farce after the jungles denizens refuse to play ball. performed in an immersive set that replicates one of the camps afghan restaurants, the show is an unabashedly entertaining attempt to map and explain the jungles brief existence. but it also explores the idea that volunteer intervention may have done more harm than good.