walmarts management assumed barclay was responsible for the stunt. he wasnt. it was the handiwork of a 19-year-old hacker and social activist named perry, a kid barclay had never met before. it didnt matter; he and perry were now in the soup together. the two fled, took refuge in an old farmhouse and began a series of untraceable podcasts. underground, underfoot and underpowered became its tagline, with every broadcast sponsored by a different beer. vermont has almost as many microbreweries as house cats.

that was that. a movement for vermonts independence was born.

in his public appearances, mckibben, a vermonter and one of the best-known environmentalists of our age, can be an extremely droll and appealing cassandra. but theres little in his many previous books to suggest he can pull off a novel-length satire. hes a serious man. (to bill maher, who complained that mckibben wasnt giving him enough hopeful news, the author said: this is your fault. you asked someone on whose most famous book was called the end of nature, o.k.?)

yet radio free vermont is a charming bit of artisanal resistance lit. its a bit rough, with the occasional nailhead poking up too high. (perrys upspeak? it gets to be, um, a bit much?) but whats surprising is how well-crafted the book is overall; how unhokey its folksiness feels, and how true its observations ring.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the finest running joke in radio free vermont  not least for being so plausible  is that barclay and his supporters are a supremely pleasant group of separatists. when he disrupts the canned music at starbucks to point out that vermont has plenty of locally owned coffee shops, he signs off with, remember: small is kind of nice. when his pal sylvia, the woman who provides him shelter in her farmhouse, hijacks a coors truck  who needs big beer in a state with hill farmstead and heady topper?  she hands the driver a picnic lunch and apologizes for including only one long trail coffee stout. were serious about dui in this state, she says, but i think youll find it filling.

photo

lest you think this is just the latest blue-state-flavored ice cream from ben & jerrys, remember: vermonters love their guns. the ability to shoot them  while skiing  figures prominently in the plot. barclay is a former coach of high school biathletes. one of his former students, a woman named trance, won a gold medal in the olympics, was a sharpshooter in iraq and ultimately becomes a heroine of the vermont independence movement.

radio free vermont is more than a fable of resistance, as its subtitle says. its a love letter to the modest, treed-in landscape of vermont, which barclay wouldnt trade for all the grandeur of montana. its a dirge for the intense cold, which barclay sorely misses  why is the world now brown in january, rather than white? (it made him feel old, mckibben writes, as if hed outlived the very climate of his life.) it is an elegy for a slower, saner vermont  the worlds rush was doing it in  and dependable yankee virtues, like neighborliness and self-reliance and financial prudence.

the book also helps contextualize bernie sanderss anti-establishment crankiness. barclay likes to remind his listeners that vermont was once its own republic.

throughout the story, the secessionist movement gains in popularity. bumper stickers start appearing on cars: barclay for governor. barclay for prime minister. post offices start flying a new free vermont flag designed by barclays 96-year-old mother. (the new york times runs a feature story under the headline, in quaint green mountain hamlets, a push for independence. gotta admit thats pretty good.) barclay increasingly devotes his podcasts to questions of feasibility were a divorce to take place: can vermonters defend themselves with guns? how would its citizens collect on their social security?

mckibben never suggests he truly believes secession is the solution in times of political turmoil. if anything, its the opposite; barclay eventually worries hes asking people to do something a little dangerous and more than a little weird. what hes proposing is merely a thought experiment, daring the reader to ponder the virtues of smallness in an age of military and corporate gigantism. in his acknowledgments, he notes that vermont has already had one minor-league attempt at a secession movement, about a decade ago, that failed, spectacularly. but if non-vermonters need refuge in the months or years ahead, he adds, youre all welcome to come to the green mountain state. well teach you to drive dirt roads in mud season.