i confess to a more-in-sorrow-than-in-anger reaction to trumps announcement. it did have the merit, as the president noted, of recognizing a reality, and that reality reflects perhaps the deepest of jewish sentiments. it was, at least, not more of the same peace-process blather.

real frustration would require belief that maintaining the unresolved status of jerusalem as a final-status bargaining chip in the peace process would make a decisive difference in that process. but, as noted above, there is none. if anything the process has been ideal camouflage for the steady growth in the number of israeli settlers (now more than 600,000), favored by prime minister benjamin netanyahus right-wing government. it has given steady israeli expansionism the international benediction of mythical reversibility. i am not convinced trump gave a lot away.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

well, some would argue, trump put paid to any notion that the united states is an honest broker between israel and the palestinians. i dont know anyone who believes that: america supports and favors israel over the palestinians for a variety of domestic political, strategic and sentimental reasons.

well, trump has provoked the unswerving ire of the palestinians (who now refuse to meet with vice president mike pence during his upcoming visit) and destroyed any chance of peace. but there is nothing unswerving about palestinian policy. it is big on rhetoric, feeble in action, reflecting powerlessness. abbas will come around if the right offer ever comes along.

well, trump undermined americas international credibility and ability to lead. sorry, hes already done that many times over. american international authority is spent, as secretary of state rex tillerson discovered this week in europe.

well, the president broke ranks with all major powers. in fact, he joined president vladimir putin. earlier this year, russia declared, we view west jerusalem as the capital of israel.

however, the russian statement was more balanced. it also said, we reaffirm our commitment to the u.n.-approved principles for a palestinian-israeli settlement, which include the status of east jerusalem as the capital of the future palestinian state.

advertisement continue reading the main story

israel, of course, claims all jerusalem as its capital (including east jerusalem, where more than 200,000 settlers live). the palestinians will not accept a peace plan in which some part of jerusalem is not their capital. trump said his statement did not prejudge the specific boundaries of the israeli sovereignty in jerusalem, but its most damaging aspect was to give strong implicit backing to israels claims, with no mention of palestines. it also put american lives in danger and humiliated a people, the palestinians, whose lives under a 50-year-old occupation are a daily exercise in humiliation. it flouted united nations security council resolutions, so undermining international law.

trumps was a silly, reckless gesture. what else is new?

jared kushner, the presidents son-in-law, is now supposed to produce his peace plan. poor, pale, languid jared! he will try to get his friends the saudis to offer big blandishments to the palestinians and israel. thats all hes got. it wont work. the greater israel project has gone too far for the ultimate deal.

since the killing of yitzhak rabin 22 years ago, at a moment when peace was within reach, the ethno-nationalist israeli religious ideologues that believe all the land between the jordan river and the mediterranean sea was deeded to israel in the bible (and never mind who lives there now) have gotten the upper hand, with netanyahus complicity. this was a successful assassination.

these are the facts. trumps statement will not change them. it was directed largely at a domestic audience of evangelicals and major american jewish groups. this, he said, was a long overdue step to advance the peace process. thats nonsense. sigh.