saugy has maintained he had no part in covering up russian doping violations at the sochi olympics, where he worked as a paid lab consultant, or in the preceding years, when he assisted in global antidoping work focused on russian athletes and conducted tests in the moscow lab that rodchenkov led related to major competitions like the 2013 track and field world championships.

investigators for the world anti-doping agency did not accept his explanations in their 2015 report. earlier this year saugy stepped down as head of the antidoping laboratory here in lausanne  a central testing facility in the same city as the international olympic committee headquarters.

we concluded that we didnt believe him, said richard pound, who led the 2015 investigation and was the founding president of the world anti-doping agency, the global regulator of drugs in sport. but we didnt have anywhere else to go with it. rodchenkov was still director of the lab in russia at the time, so he was not forthcoming with us at all."

when asked through his lawyer last week about saugys potential involvement in russias schemes, rodchenkov said investigators had been misled.

i owe professor saugy an apology, rodchenkov said. much speculation has been reported that he somehow helped me cover up doping in russia. i certainly thought and hoped that he would be helpful to us  because i lied to him and convinced him that we were clean.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

rodchenkov said he had suggested saugy would help because of the mens friendship. both were former runners with shared interests in chemistry and literature. they both liked the book 1984 by george orwell, each said.

this was not because he was corrupt but because he believed in me, rodchenkov said of having implicated saugy. he is completely innocent.

in an interview in lausanne on friday, saugy  who has also served as an antidoping adviser for the global governing bodies of track and field and soccer  said he was grateful.

advertisement continue reading the main story

he argued he had been vigilant in unearthing and reporting early clues to russias schemes starting in 2007. we revealed manipulations of samples in russia prior to the beijing games, he said of his lab, going on to cite a 2011 scientific paper he co-wrote. that paper examined thousands of blood samples collected from elite track and field athletes from 2001 to 2009: russia stood out, with a higher number of suspicious samples  something he says he helped bring to regulators attention.

saugy said he had nothing to hide about his time spent working in the moscow lab, or about the nature of his work in sochi. the collaboration of lausanne with the moscow lab was done always in a fully transparent way with the full support of iaaf, wada and the i.o.c., saugy said friday, referring to track officials, regulators and the olympic committee.

saugy came under previous suspicion in the united states in the case of lance armstrong. he worked as an antidoping adviser to cycling officials, and he was accused by american antidoping officials of having helped armstrong beat drug tests, which he disputes. he says he simply delivered a scientific analysis of what constituted a drug violation versus what did not, noting what was not permissible under global sports rules.

pound said his 2015 investigation had not taken that part of saugys past into account. his commission focused strictly on russias systematic drug violations in track and field, he said.

i dedicated my whole life to fight against doping with the idea to have a cleaner sport, saugy said friday. i cannot believe that anybody thinks that i could be a cheater myself.