13 of our favorite travel reads from 2017 from a meditation on the caribbeans future after the hurricanes to an exploration of the haunted side of bangkok, here are some of our favorite travel articles from the past year.

image credit gaby d'alessandro

the novelist edwidge danticat reflects on the devastation from hurricanes irma and maria to many caribbean islands whose economies rely on tourism.

image the alhambra in granada, spain. credit daniel rodrigues for the new york times

it was summer in granada, and i told myself i was in love, the novelist alexander chee writes. that wouldnt last.

image

how one woman transformed the marshy, wooded chesapeake bay region, first a gateway through which slave traders brought africans, into a route to liberation.

image credit meryl rowin

paris is a good place to mourn. i would say this even if my uncle richard hadnt lived there, but all the more so that he had.

image heading down the road in tallahassee, floridas surprisingly quiet capital. credit phil sears for the new york times

its a much-mocked place  but also many states in one. all of them can be fascinating and, yes, sometimes weird.

image the old town square in plock, poland. before the nazi occupation, the city had a thriving jewish community. credit andreas meichsner for the new york times

from the jewish districts of historic cities to small, out-of-the-way towns once known as shtetls, the author finds remnants of the past at every turn.

image a slough on the mississippi river in greenville. credit robert rausch for the new york times

the great river road, the byway that runs next to the mississippi river, was the organizing principle of a road trip that took a family through the history of this land.

image credit klaus kremmerz

one summer, the novelist joyce maynard and the man who would become her husband embarked on an unlikely journey through the heart of new england.

image vancouver island's sombrio beach, near the juan de fuca marine trail, can be reached by a scenic path from the parking area. credit robert leon for the new york times

revered in british columbia, little known in the u.s., the artist emily carr, born in victoria in 1871, may be from another era, but amid environmental concerns, her words and images resonate.

image vineyards striped with other cultivated crops are common in gascony, the other south of france. credit andy haslam for the new york times

even a week or so spent eating and drinking your way around this rural area of southwestern france is enough to spark a lifelong love affair.

image a busy street in bangkok, where moments of pure chance can flick a switch and change the direction of your internal electrical circuit. credit david terrazas for the new york times

in a city filled with haunted sites, ghosts are woven into the fabric of daily life.

image a statue by rubin eynon titled gallos, the cornish word for power, stands sentinel at tintagel castle in cornwall. king arthur and his sword excalibur come to mind. credit andy haslam for the new york times

the area is a place of pilgrimage for late-model would-be knights of the round table, as well as mystical seekers of many stripes.

image campus martius park in detroit, a downtown space that has become a magnet for pedestrians and events. credit tony cenicola/the new york times.

how a 21st-century detroit navigates the dangers of regeneration is a particularly poignant question on the 50th anniversary of the 1967 detroit race riots.

get the travel dispatch newsletter every saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more. see sample please verify youre not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * required field you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times products and services. thank you for subscribing. view all new york times newsletters. an error has occurred. please try again later. you are already subscribed to this email. view all new york times newsletters. sign up