the act of hearing a visual highlights the trippy fact that our senses do not operate the way we often assume, with crisp boundaries between them. smelling, hearing and tasting all speak to each other and influence each other, so little things like the color of the plate youre eating on can influence how food tastes, said mr. fassnidge.

where did this gif come from? chris, an animator who goes by the name happytoast, has been surprised by the attention the gif has received. the sense of sound was there from the start, but i didnt think it was as big a deal as its turned out to be! he wrote about the gif, which he created nearly ten years ago in response to a pylons-themed challenge on a digital art forum. for him, the reason it works, is more about a sense of weight than noise.

it may feel like the world is right in front of us, he said, but its not so simple.

but what is going on when we vear? and what is it about that particular gif that makes it so loud for so many?

rob desalle, an evolutionary geneticist and curator of the our senses exhibit at the american museum of natural history, calls it a clever illusion caused by filling in.

our brains see this and they say, wow, a pylon of that size bouncing up and down should be making a noise, he said. so we hear one.

mr. fassnidge agreed that there is something about the pylons gif that makes it particularly easy to imagine what it might sound like. visual hearing is often about some intersection of perception, memory and imagination all coming together, he said.

but how do you explain the fact that some people can hear visual recordings of flashing lights, motions and other scenes that might be silent in real life? why do some people have much more advanced vearing than others?

advertisement continue reading the main story

its too early in the research to say. but dr. freemans and mr. fassnidges working theory is that the degree to which one can hear based on visuals likely has to do with how much a given persons visual and auditory areas talk to each other in the brain.

using electrical brain stimulation, we have also found tentative signs that visual and auditory brain areas cooperate more in people with vear, while they tend to compete with each other, in non-vear people, dr. freeman said in an email. so people who claim to hear visual motion have brains that seem to work slightly differently.

individuals with frequent or advanced vearing may have a form of synesthesia, a neurological phenomenon in which one sense feeds into another, he said. in other types of synesthesia, sounds might be linked to colors or words with tastes.

having this particular kind of synesthesia may be confusing for individuals who dont realize whats going on.

that was the case for dr. freeman, who said he hears most things that move or flash. when he inquired if others could hear the buzzing of flashing lights emitted by a distant tower, for example, he got quizzical looks. so i stopped asking people.

then he came across a paper by two neurobiologists at caltech, melissa saenz and christof koch, often credited with first discovering the form of synesthesia he experiences. their paper convinced him he was not a lone weirdo, and that the topic was worthy of additional investigation.

at synesthesia conferences, hes met others who have even more pronounced visual hearing, most notably lidell simpson, for whom the world is a very noisy place, though he is technically deaf.

everything i see, taste, touch and smell get translated into sound, he explained over email. i can never shut it off.

advertisement continue reading the main story

his vearing may be so advanced because before he was fitted for a hearing aid as a toddler, the auditory bits of his brain were learning to process vision instead  and when they got the hearing aid, sound and vision fused in his brain, mr. fassnidge said.

even for those with just average vearing, the sound of a flash of light can be powerful enough to drown out real-world sounds, the researchers have found in their lab.

its also possible that those of us who grew up surrounded by noisy environments have been hearing based on visuals for years without realizing it, mr. fassnidge added in an email.

i might assume i am hearing the footsteps of a person walking on the other side of the street, when really the sound exists only in my mind, he said.



the noisy pylons gif, in that sense, reveals that we have this unusual ability  and that some of our daily soundtrack may actually be rooted in imagination.