once i returned, i saw him darkly flipping through my copy. i ducked. franks, he finally pronounced with congratulatory gravity, i dont think of you as a woman anymore. you write like a man.

i still cant help thinking of this as the ultimate compliment. i was already brainwashed.

when the sluice opened a few months ago and men across all industries began to take sudden and precipitous falls, at first, i was slightly skeptical. i was puzzled by the stories some women told about freezing up, unable to repel a boss or sometimes even a co-worker. a few maintained that when they did resist, they felt guilty and fearful, and wrote emails the next day apologizing and asking for another chance. i felt bad for them, and yet my honest reaction was confusion: what feminist, i wondered, would be so desperate as to trade her self-respect for a job?

as the stories about what these women experienced became more perverted and even downright weird, i wondered whether male hubris had finally gone berserk. had the sexualization of american popular culture in the 1990s and 2000s taken the restraints off the male id, freeing men to pursue their most absurd fantasies  holding professional interviews at their homes, parading around naked under open bathrobes in front of job applicants? had feminism, with its promotion of sexual freedom, combined with these cultural changes, paradoxically poured gas on the fires of these workplace assaults? or had this stomach-turning type of aggression simply evaded the rumor mill but been happening all along?

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

as i thought about this, more of my own memories came back. had our pioneering generation deceived ourselves?

of course, back then we were fully aware of the quid pro quo of the casting couch, where men in power could use that power to make or break a young womans career. we warned our sisters, but we spoke in whispers, never aloud. maybe we were more afraid than we admitted.

even if most of us may not have suffered serious sexual harassment, how many of us sustained more hidden damage inflicted by insecure men  especially if we had the audacity to be successful?

two years after i joined the news service, i won the pulitzer prize. i suffered for it mightily. that i was the first woman to win for national reporting  i had been brought to new york to do a five-part series on the violent antiwar weatherman group  made it only worse. i could see it in their bowed heads: weve been striving for years to win that coveted prize and a 24-year-old walks away with it! the entire bureau of men refused to speak to me that day and the days after.

advertisement continue reading the main story

i was haunted by the creeping conviction that i didnt deserve the prize  i should give it back. for at least the next 10 years, i was too ashamed to tell people id won.

subtler moments of discrimination in my younger days have been coming back over the past few weeks: the stories killed before id even finished them; the time i came back to work after visiting my ailing mother and a man my age, hired for much higher wages, had been awarded my promised transfer to paris.

when you get older, gender discrimination gets easier, somewhat predictable and sometimes even funny. but it doesnt stop  even if youve published four books and had a long journalism career. when my last book came out, i was interviewed by a certain talk show host, before he was stripped of his job because of gross sexual misconduct charges. i had hardly opened my mouth before he fell asleep. during the rest of the interview, he kept nodding off while the camera judiciously avoided him. when i left the studio, he had popped awake for his new guests. i saw him waving his hands enthusiastically while speaking with two high-powered male journalists.

i herald this latest female generation for their courage in revealing their humiliations for the chance to change society. we, the earliest female newswomen, were tough, ambitious, even cocky about our talent, but over the years, our self-confidence was often irreparably harmed. our generation might have been smart, but there was much we just didnt get. grateful to win a place in the hierarchy of power, we didnt understand the ways that gender degradation still shaped our work lives.

a few years ago, i met a fellow who had won a pulitzer for foreign reporting the year before. when he finally discovered what we had in common, he said in a scolding voice: youre the shyest pulitzer winner ive ever met. do you understand you won the highest award in journalism? when i got it, i shouted it to the skies. 

and the skies clearly listened.