go-jek, which launched its main app in 2015 and is in only indonesia at the moment, is counting on people coming back to its services again and again as it competes against both uber and grab, a singapore-based ride-hailing company operating in seven southeast asian countries.

we have huge respect for uber as a technology company, said nadiem makarim, go-jeks 33-year-old founder and chief executive. but we just out-innovate them. we just move that much faster.

photo

photo

southeast asia, a region of 600 million people that is adding more internet users each month than anywhere else on the planet, has become a magnet for tech investment  and one of the toughest battlegrounds for uber, which is under pressure to curb its losses around the world ahead of a planned public offering.

grab, which was valued at $6 billion after its latest fund-raising, recently said it had completed its billionth ride. by contrast, lyft, ubers largest american rival, has reached half that.

it is a super growth market, said brooks entwistle, chief business officer in asia for uber, which on friday announced it had agreed to form a joint venture with a singapore taxi company to strengthen its competitiveness in the region. theres no question there are challenges.

chinas biggest tech companies, spying opportunity in the region, have contributed to those challenges.

go-jek is backed by tencent holdings, the video game and social media behemoth. grab this year received a combined $2 billion in investment from didi chuxing, the ride-hailing powerhouse that outgunned uber in china, and the japanese conglomerate softbank.

advertisement continue reading the main story

outside of transport, the alibaba group, which dominates online shopping in china, controls a regional e-commerce company called lazada and has invested in tokopedia, an indonesian site. tencent is a major shareholder of sea, a singapore-based company that operates a video game platform, shopping site and digital payments service.

photo

photo

photo

we all looked to china to learn to develop e-commerce, said nick nash, seas president. the playbook was clear.

it is no accident that jakarta has attracted so many companies that help people get around  or that help them avoid having to get around in the first place.

the capital of the worlds fourth-most-populous nation has 10 million residents but no metro system. the traffic is so soul-crushing at all times that many residents have stopped speaking of discrete rush hours.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

in southeast asia, theres little public transport, many dense cities and low car ownership, said ming maa, grabs president. it makes ride-sharing a much more compelling product than in india or even, frankly, china.

before ride-hailing apps came along, motorcycle taxis, or ojek in indonesian, plied jakartas clogged streets. but getting a good price required haggling. and safety was a concern, particularly for women.

go-jek is a lifesaver, said hera diani, a magazine editor in jakarta. she orders food on the app, and booked a pedicure through go-life when she was pregnant and couldnt walk easily. the traffic jams are getting worse and worse, she said.

both grab and go-jek are making big pushes outside transportation. the companies want their app-based wallets to replace cash as the main way indonesians pay for coffee, fried rice and everything else offline, as is commonplace in chinese cities.

it is unproven, though, that people will stick with a payment app just because they use it for rides. chinas dominant mobile payment services, alipay and wechat pay, grew big because they could easily be used to buy stuff online and transfer money to friends, respectively.

advertisement continue reading the main story

transport is a very, very large marketplace  i would argue, larger than e-commerce, said mr. maa of grab. we think that creates the right ground for an amazing payments company.