over the years, christine centenera, the stylist and fashion director of vogue australia, found that she was constantly being solicited for fashion advice. her sisters would wonder about a well-tailored black blazer that didnt cost an arm and a leg; friends would inquire where to buy the best t-shirts or the simplest black trousers.

youre always asked these questions, she says. and often i find it difficult to send them places that are reasonable  middle-ground but really well-made pieces.

so along with her partner of 10 years, the australian designer josh goot, centenera decided to design the solution: wardrobe nyc, an edited collection of high-quality basics for men and women, which launches online tomorrow.

the full collection features only 16 pieces: eight for men and eight for women, the basis for what goot and centenera feel is a simple, unimpeachable wardrobe that would work for people in many different professions, regardless of personal styles, ages and body types. (many of the pieces are cut generously and range in sizes; their mens t-shirt, for one, runs from small to 3xl.) the mens collection includes a roomy overcoat, a two-button blazer, a t-shirt, a pair of loosefitting trousers and a hoodie; for women, there is also a gloriously big coat, a white collarless shirt, black leggings, an a-line skirt and more. everything is black or white  a palette goot calls democratic and solutions-based. together, the clothes seem like the kinds of things youd want to wear so often, you might be inspired to purge your closet of everything else.

advertisement continue reading the main story

this is our way of saying to people, this season, this is what we think you should be wearing, centenera says, as the couple share a couch in their light-filled noho loft, pieces from the new collection hanging on a rack nearby. being authoritative is our way of providing a solution for people. i think that is a huge solution for people to get on with their lives and not having to be so challenged by what and how to put things together.

photo

the collection is produced entirely in italy and will be sold exclusively on the brands site. for both men and women, the entire eight-piece wardrobe costs $3,000; also available is a four-piece core wardrobe ($1,500) which consists, for women, of a blazer, a t-shirt, a button-down and a skirt, and for men, of a blazer, a button-down, a t-shirt and trousers. items are not available individually.