the issue has long inflamed the right, but most recently flared up in response to the release in 2015 of a heavily edited video purporting to show a planned parenthood official discussing the illegal sale of fetal parts. that video prompted house republicans to form a select investigative panel that spent 15 months examining fetal tissues sale. the panel produced a 471-page report last december but no charges.

on friday, anti-abortion groups welcomed the news that the justice department may have picked up the cause, and they urged congress to cut off federal funding to planned parenthood, a favorite target, in light of the investigation.

march for life welcomes any action taken by the d.o.j. that signals a serious, thorough investigation into planned parenthoods profitable practice of selling baby body parts, the groups president, jeanne mancini, said. taxpayer funds should not support an organization under federal investigation for such serious matters.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

dana singiser, planned parenthoods vice president for government relations, said the group had done nothing wrong and pointed to investigations into its handling of fetal tissue by other congressional committees and more than a dozen states, which concluded the same thing.

these accusations are baseless, and a part of a widely discredited attempt to end access to reproductive health care at planned parenthood, she said in a statement. planned parenthood has never, and would never, profit while facilitating its patients choice to donate fetal tissue for use in important medical research.

democrats on capitol hill castigated the department for the flagrant politicization of its mission, as representative jerrold nadler of new york, the top democrat on the house judiciary committee, put it.

in the case of the 2015 video, planned parenthood said that its representative was merely discussing such legal charges and adamantly denied any wrongdoing. that did not stop republicans, who controlled key congressional committees, including the senate judiciary committee, from launching a series of investigations based on the video.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the judiciary committees report, human fetal tissue research: context and controversy, concluded that the executive branch had for years failed to exercise oversight on the tissue transfer process and created a situation where costs and fees were not properly accounted for. the report recommended that the justice department fully investigate the fetal tissue practices of planned parenthood, its affiliates, and three companies involved in the sale of the tissue for potential crimes.

senator charles e. grassley, republican of iowa and the committees chairman, has said the referral fell on deaf ears at the obama justice department. in a hearing this fall, he pressed mr. sessions to reconsider it. the attorney general said he would personally evaluate the referral and make sure it is properly handled.

the f.b.i. first requested unredacted documents from the committee last month, but mr. grassley requested that the department submit a formal letter.

mr. nadler, who was also a member of the special house committee assembled to investigate the issue, said he did not understand why the issue was being revisited.

it is unclear what it expects to find after five congressional investigations, over a dozen of state investigations, and millions in taxpayer dollars found absolutely zero evidence of wrongdoing.