what we learned in 2017 developments in science, medicine and health that were still thinking about at years end.

its impossible to say that any particular scientific development was the most important in a given year. but if we had to choose some highlights, wed opt for these unforgettable events and findings.

we learned that nothing brings people together like the sun hiding behind the moon.

image eclipse-watchers on nye beach in newport, ore., on aug. 21. credit toni greaves for the new york times

on aug. 21, the country came to a pause as millions of americans  even the president  put on eclipse glasses and stopped to take in the first eclipse to cross the united states since 1918. its path across the united states was a scientific bonanza for astronomers who were able to more easily point advanced equipment at the sun. its not too soon to start making your plans for the 2024 solar eclipse.

we learned that you can never turn a wolf into a pet dog.

video scientists arent entirely sure how wolves evolved into dogs, but new research into the genetic and social behavior of wolf pups may offer some clues.

james gorman, a times reporter, accompanied scientists who are trying to understand the genes that distinguish dogs from wolves. humans who raise wolf puppies must spend 24 hours a day, seven days a week with them in order to socialize these puppies for scientific study. and while the pups may seem cute, they will grow to be predatory wolves, not humanitys faithful companions. the researchers hope their work will help reveal the trigger that made some ancient wolves into the dogs we know today.

we learned about fetal surgerys potential to change lives.

image surgeons operating on a 24-week-old fetus at texas childrens hospital in houston. credit batrice de ga for the new york times

a times reporter, denise grady, went inside an operating room to observe an experimental technique to treat severe spina bifida in a 24-week-old fetus. the doctors performing the surgery hope it will result in superior outcomes for children born with the disorder. their first 28 surgeries have seen good results so far. jan. 14 is the due date for the mother who was the subject of the article.

we learned about the power of human ingenuity in our solar systems deep reaches.

image a composite view of saturn made by the cassini spacecraft. credit nasa/jpl-caltech/space science institute

the cassini spacecraft has been sending home images of saturn, its rings and its moons since arriving at the gas giant in 2004. the mission ended in september with a planned fiery crash into saturns atmosphere. while it studied the planet, cassini explored moons  titan and enceladus  that could be home to extraterrestrial life. the probe also gave us great insight into our solar system, and will continue to do so for years as scientists pore over the data it collected.

we learned that animals may make choices based on aesthetics.

image richard o. prum birdwatching in connecticut. credit christopher capozziello for the new york times

why does beauty exist? to answer this question, richard o. prum, an ornithologist, is working to revive an idea advanced by charles darwin: the attractiveness of an animal to another of its species isnt only tied to fitness and good genes. rather, animals  especially birds in dr. prums work  are making subjective decisions. he hopes that evolutionary biologists will stop explaining away desire.

we learned that there is new hope for africans with treatable cancers.

image a patient in the cancer institute of mulago hospital in kampala, uganda. credit charlie shoemaker for the new york times

major pharmaceutical companies, working with the american cancer society, will steeply discount cancer drugs for patients in african countries. cancer kills 450,000 people across the continent each year, but many types here are among the most treatable: breast, cervical and prostate tumors. the new initiative to provide medication is modeled on efforts to bring cheap aids drugs to africa, but the effort also aims to help overcome the shortage of oncologists there.

we learned about the causes and consequences of rising obesity around the world.

image brazils obesity rate has nearly doubled to 20 percent over the last decade. credit william daniels for the new york times

makers of processed food, soda and fast food see markets in the developing world as their greatest growth opportunities. at the same time, obesity rates and weight-related illnesses are on the rise in developing countries. an ongoing series of articles examined the interaction of these two trends, starting with cases in brazil, ghana and colombia. taken together, these stories reveal a new global food order, and a new health crisis.

we learned that there could be more solar systems with planets like ours.

video these new earth-size planets orbit a dwarf star named trappist-1 about 40 light years from earth. some of them could have water on their surfaces.

the cool red dwarf star, trappist-1, is 40 light years from earth. of its seven planets, three could be at the right distance to contain oceans of water and may have the right conditions for life. while astronomers have detected planets around many stars in the milky way, this system was the first known to host so many planets with possibilities for life.

we learned about a warehouse that is like a mausoleum for endangered species.

image a tiger's head and a stuffed macaque monkey. credit tristan spinski for the new york times

when contraband goods made from prohibited wildlife are seized in the united states, they find their way to the national wildlife property repository near denver. pictures taken by tristan spinski from inside the facility  shoes made of leopard skin, a lamp made with zebra hooves, a sea turtles skull, an elephant foot stool  testify to the human appetite for other species, rachel nuwer wrote for the times in july.

we learned about the lingering toll of this frightening epidemic.

image vera lcia da silva with her daughter, sophia, who has microcephaly, brought on by zika, in a hospital in recife, brazil. credit adriana zehbrauskas for the new york times

late last year, the world health organization declared that zika virus was no longer a global emergency. but the diseases effects on babies who may live for decades are only beginning to be understood. in northeastern brazil, where links between the virus and birth defects like microcephaly were first detected, families struggle to give the best lives possible to stricken babies. researchers hope to find clues about the viruss effects on the fetus by studying pairs of twins in brazil in which one was born with birth defects and the other was not.

we learned that we could see a source of ripples in space-time.

video for the first time, astronomers have seen and heard a pair of neutron stars collide in a crucible of cosmic alchemy.

astronomers confirmed a key of part of einsteins general theory of relativity in 2016 when they announced that the ligo array had detected gravitational waves released by the collision of two black holes. the researchers won a nobel prize for the discovery. but theyre not done: in october, scientists found two dead stars colliding  not only hearing the ripples in space-time they made, but confirming the event visually with powerful telescopes. collisions of neutron stars are believed to be the source of all heavy metals in the universe, including gold and silver, and the detection by ligo helps verify accepted explanations of how the chemistry of the universe formed.

we learned its challenging to contain the spread of an old s.t.d.

image erinn williams, a disease intervention specialist, filling out a report after drawing blood from a potential syphilis patient in her car in oklahoma city. credit nick oxford for the new york times

for decades, syphilis was considered a sexually transmitted disease of the past. but a fast-spreading outbreak in oklahoma city confirmed public health data showing syphilis on the rise again in the united states, spreading as a consequence of the heroin and methamphetamine epidemics. investigators in the conservative states capital raced for months this year to contain the disease, turning to tools like facebook to find infected people and get them into treatment.

we learned that even addicted mothers are needed by their newborns.

image left, jamie clay and her oldest daughter, jakiah rayne clay, watching one-day-old jayla cyanne clay, right, being fed in the nursery at a hospital in richmond, ky., in march. ms. clay sought treatment for opioid addiction when she found out she was pregnant with her second daughter. credit ty wright for the new york times

in recent years there has been a sharp increase in the number of babies born dependent on drugs, especially opioids. such babies are often taken from their mothers, who struggle to visit them as they wrestle with their addictions. but a growing body of evidence suggests that separating these babies from their mothers slows the infants recovery. the difficulties of one mother in kentucky, jamie clay, underscored the complicated balance of recovery for both mother and child in americas epidemic of opioid addiction.

____

like the science times page on facebook.| sign up for the science times newsletter.

sign up for science times well bring you stories that capture the wonders of the human body, nature and the cosmos. see sample please verify youre not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * required field you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times products and services. thank you for subscribing. view all new york times newsletters. an error has occurred. please try again later. you are already subscribed to this email. view all new york times newsletters. sign up