photo

if it looked like a duck, did it swim like a duck?

paleontologists studying an unusual fossil have identified a new dinosaur, related to the velociraptor, that had a neck like a swan, a snout like a goose and forelimbs like flippers. the creatures hodgepodge of features  so strange that extra work was needed to verify the fossils authenticity  suggest that it might have lived on both land and in water, they reported in a paper published wednesday in nature.

if so, that would make the species, known as halszkaraptor escuilliei, only the second swimming dinosaur ever found, after the ferocious spinosaurus (though even that is debated).

the clues that suggest h. escuilliei was semiaquatic include its long neck and hooked, crocodile-like teeth, which it may have used to plunge face first at fish from the water surface. the dinosaur also had a snout filled with sensory nerves that are typically seen in crocodiles and used to detect movement and temperature changes in water. its forelimbs were shaped less like wings and more like flippers, similar to those used by marine reptiles like the plesiosaur to swim.

it was designed for swimming, said pascal godefroit, a paleontologist at the royal belgian institute of natural sciences in brussels and an author on the paper, but which kind of swimming we dont know.

photo

perhaps it used its flipper-like forelimbs to maneuver like a penguin. or its long legs to wade through water like a crane or heron. dr. godefroit said the dinosaur lacked webbed feet, so it is unlikely that it swam like a swan, gracefully gliding on the waters surface while feverishly paddling below. instead, its legs and clawed feet were better suited for running on land. but if the dinosaur used its feet to propel itself in the water, it would not have been as effective a swimmer as a swan or duck, dr. godefroit said. it also was probably not a diver like some water fowl.

advertisement continue reading the main story

though the prehistoric oceans were teeming with fierce marine predators like the ichthyosaurs and mesosaurs, those leviathans were not dinosaurs, but rather marine reptiles like sea turtles. the newly discovered h. escuilliei was a turkey-sized raptor. this finding helps show that the raptor group included not only terrestrial killing machines like deinonychus and potentially flying members like microraptor, but also swimmers.