this was the sixth time that mr. garcetti had given one of this briefings and once again, he was flanked by two men who have been key in coordinating this response: the fire chief, ralph m. terrazas, and the police chief, charlie beck. mr. terrazas, who mr. garcetti promoted to what in this city is a particularly important job, has been briefing mr. garcetti before his news conferences, reporting to the mayor every few hours on the latest development.

on monday, at the mayors weekly cabinet meeting, mr. terrazas warned the mayor about extreme conditions that could lead to disastrous fires later that week. he was proved right the next day, though he was not ready on thursday to declare game over.

this has been a long week and we are not done yet, mr. terrazas said, wearing a protective yellow jacket and an l.a.f.d. cap. tomorrow morning will be day 5 of a multiday santa ana event.

you can see some improvement, mr. terrazas said, referring to fire conditions. but its still in extreme range.

more coverage from the times of the california fires:

follow live updates today here.

what to take and when to evacuate

it burns and it keeps burning: scenes from southern californias wildfires

californias fires by the numbers

maps: where the fires are spreading in southern california

in a warming california, a future of flames

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story california today the news and stories that matter to californians (and anyone else interested in the state). sign up to get it by email. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

california online fires edition

(please note: we regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)

advertisement continue reading the main story

 big weaponry arrives to battle the fires: a 747 supertanker. big enough for murrieta in riverside county  but too big for the tricky canyons of los angeles. [los angeles daily news]

 help from northern neighbors as well. bay area firefighters rush down to lend a hand in southern california. were just repaying the favor. [san francisco chronicle]

 the lilac fire sent hundreds of thoroughbreds on a panicked run around the track, trying to escape the smoke and flames at san luis rey downs, 45 miles north of san diego. theres a lot of dead horses. [san diego union-tribune]

 fighting back: a resolve to rebuild in the hills of ventura. [ventura county star]

 destroyed in the wake of the california fires: mobile homes in a retirement community. [sacramento bee]

 another point of view from the director of the california chaparral institute: california is burning because of bad planning  not because of a natural disaster. [los angeles times]

 how do wildfires start? people. humans are the only sources of fires during santa ana winds. part of this argument is that power lines, which cause a lot of fires, wouldnt exist without people. [the orange county register]

 check out this photoessay of otherworldly scenes as the thomas fire burns through the night. [los angeles times]

heres some non-fire news

photo

 the republican tax bill moving through congress scales back incentives for wind and solar power, and could raise energy costs for states like california. [the new york times]

advertisement continue reading the main story

 the california state senate is about to gets its first woman president. toni atkins, a san diego democrat, also will be the first openly gay leader of the senate. [sacramento bee]

 rep. devin nunes, the tulare republican, was cleared by the house ethics committee of disclosing classified information related to the house russia investigation. [fresno bee]

 this may not actually be news anymore: home prices in the bay area shot up last month. [the mercury news]

photo

 exhibits at the hammer museum, the california african-american museum and the los angeles county museum of art make the new york times best art list for 2017. [new york times]

and finally 

throughout its time in office, the obama administration was dogged by republican state attorneys general who filed lawsuits tying up in court its policies on matters like health care and immigration. now, the trump administration is facing the same kind of assault from democratic state attorneys general like xavier becerra of california.

mr. becerra, a former congressman from los angeles who was appointed california attorney general this year to succeed kamala harris when she became a united states senator, has filed around 20 lawsuits against the federal government, challenging its policies on scaling back environmental regulations, cracking down on immigration enforcement, and more.

but, speaking to new york times reporters during a visit to washington this week, mr. becerra sidestepped a suggestion that he was taking a page from the playbook of obama-era republican attorneys general like scott pruitt  the trump administrations deregulation-minded head of the environmental protection agency who rose to national prominence as oklahoma attorney general by suing the obama administration, and who is now being sued by mr. becerra.

i havent opened one of their books, mr. becerra said. were doing this because its existential for california to be able to continue doing what were doing.

advertisement continue reading the main story

we have, by a factor of about 10, more clean-energy jobs in california than there are jobs in the entire coal mining industry, he said. all of that could be put at risk by all of these rollbacks.

 charlie savage, national security and legal affairs reporter in washington

california today goes live at 6 a.m. pacific time weekdays. tell us what you want to see: catoday@nytimes.com.

california today is edited by julie bloom, who grew up in los angeles and graduated from u.c. berkeley.