the social typology of elvis fandom extends to mr. hallyday, too, though the lines are less firmly drawn. another common refrain in the obituaries is that he was a man of the people. a working-class hero.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

johnny was a bit thuggish, embraced by people who worked in factories, said olivier seiler, a parisian production designer and one of the few people i know who harbors an unabashed and unreconstructed love of mr. hallyday. the french elite is made up of well-spoken front-row kids like emmanuel macron, products of exclusive schools, and often from aristocratic families. mr. hallyday was for those who didnt do so well on the test, and in france, thats most people. flunking out in france is not glamorous the way it can be in america, where enough college dropouts become silicon alley moguls that its a cultural clich. johnnys rebelliousness may no longer be connected to a youthquake, but it still means something.

even if most hip parisians dumped johnny in the 1970s, that still left a lot of incredibly loyal fans. many will be present on the champs-lyses  ground zero for celebrating national soccer wins and commemorating war anniversaries  on saturday for mr. hallydays funeral, in the company of president macron and a long line of bikers. some are using the occasion of mr. hallydays death to affirm their uncoolness as a point of pride. a rough translation of what one young woman wrote on twitter is: there are those who look at the fans of johnny like, im dying, look at all these losers. but, hey, no one asked you, marie-jeanne. its lunchtime, so go eat your quinoa salmon bowl and let people be sad if they want.

there is no loyalty quite like french loyalty. as i learned after moving to paris in 2006, when compared with americans, the french may be standoffish and circumspect at first, but once they let you in, you are family.

they do not let go of old stars easily either. even if someones music has become objectively terrible, if he was once embraced, he will be forever. to wit, the runaway success of stars 80. the first time i heard of it, i thought it referred to star 80, bob fosses retelling of the murder of dorothy stratten. quite the opposite.

stars 80  its french, the s is silent!  is a concert series featuring the absolute worst of 1980s french pop. it toured 10 years ago as a nostalgia revival and sold out stadiums all over the country. so great was its success that it spawned a comedy film franchise starring the same talent whose third installation came out in french theaters last week. (disclosure: my partner worked on it as an assistant art director last year.) i will not be rushing to the cin, but i do not begrudge anyone elses doing so.

as low-cost airfare, instagram and avocado toast homogenize our leisure pursuits, encroaching on frances exceptionalism, the french treasure anything theirs and only theirs steadfastly. i dont blame them. johnnys fame is most connected to frances cherished trente glorieuses, the 30 prosperous years after world war ii  which is the same period that brought the country its lavish social security system and a taxpayer-funded culture industry that allows people like my partner to work on movies and television productions without fear of penury.

the night of my long walk back from the wedding turned out to be a history-making night for johnnys fans: the concert was free, celebrating his 40th anniversary as a singer, and was attended by an estimated 350,000 people. a good mile away from the tower, we turned around and, like so many other enchanted americans before us, watched it sparkle. paris was beautiful spread out below. i wouldnt have seen it zipping away in a cab.

advertisement continue reading the main story

over the weekend, the eiffel tower will be emblazoned with the message merci, johnny. this time i will not be rolling my eyes.