the kremlin dismissed the details of both schemes as absurd, but on tuesday russia was barred from the 2018 winter games for its state-backed cheating. some individual russian athletes may compete independently in neutral uniforms, but the russian flag will not appear when the games begin in pyeongchang.

the details of the sports scandal  deconstructed by russian whistle-blowers who have provided rare insider insights  offer perhaps the purest case study of russias drive to dominate, its brazen methods and, in part, its motivation to influence the american presidency.

in a declassified intelligence report released early this year, united states officials said russias attacks on the election had been, for mr. putin, partial payback for the doping scandal, which he repeatedly called an american-led effort to defame russia. last month, as new medals were stripped from russian olympians, mr. putin said the disqualifications were the united states attempt to undermine his re-election.

in fact, sports regulators and investigators who conducted the multiple investigations into russias doping are headquartered in canada, and the olympic leadership in charge of disqualifying athletes is based in switzerland. it was the former president of that staunchly neutral country, samuel schmid, who conducted the latest investigation for the olympic committee, resulting in tuesdays sanctions.

in scrutinizing russia, sports and antidoping officials have said they acted on objective forensic and scientific evidence of russias fraud: documents, data, lab analyses and glass bottles of urine with telltale signs of tampering. just as allies of the special counsel robert mueller have done this year in the context of the election inquiry, the officials have defended their impartiality and interest in plain facts.

three key whistle-blowers helped provide those facts: grigory rodchenkov, russias former longtime chief antidoping chemist, as well as yuliya and vitaly stepanov, a former russian runner and a former employee of the nations antidoping agency. all now live in the united states, in undisclosed locations from which they have spoken openly about years of coordinated cheating. the justice department, too, has taken interest in their evidence.

dr. rodchenkov, whose personal diaries cataloged each day of cheating in sochi, came to the united states only after vitaly mutko  russias deputy prime minister and former sports minister  asked him to resign in light of growing global suspicions about the extent of the nations cheating, which the chemist had helped mastermind.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

today we also have a meeting, how to come from defensive to offensive, dr. rodchenkov wrote to me in an email on nov. 10, 2015, having initially denied wrongdoing in our early exchanges. at that meeting, mr. mutko effectively dismissed him and set off a dramatic chain of events: freedom! he wrote in another email that night.

advertisement continue reading the main story

dr. rodchenkovs tell-all account, reported in the times in may 2016 and detailed in the documentary icarus, culminated in russias olympic ban this week. it was instrumental in motivating some russian officials to temper their rigid denials and acknowledge that an institutional conspiracy had existed, though they maintained it had not been state sponsored.

still, before this weeks final sanctions were announced, global athletes, antidoping advocates and some sponsors had expressed concern about a growing crisis in international sports, pointing to the long delay by both regulators and olympic officials in responding to evidence of widespread cheating that went even beyond sochi.

as those critics wondered when or if sports officials would penalize russia for its systematic transgressions by rescinding olympic medals and condemning the state-supported schemes, they questioned not just fundamental frailties in drug-testing controls but also the independence of antidoping authorities.

one year later, similar basic questions about separation of power have taken on renewed relevance in american politics as a result of russias breaches. those questions have followed mr. trumps repeated attacks on the independence of the justice department, in defiance of the post-watergate norms intended to insulate law enforcement from partisan and personal agendas.

in the same way that mr. trump has avoided acknowledging evidence of russias interference in the election, thomas bach, president of the international olympic committee, took more than a year to accept the extensive evidence of russias interference in the sochi olympic lab operations.

other sports officials, such as the president of skiings governing body, initially told me that the evidence on russia was conspiratorial or too hollywood, just as some republican lawmakers have doubted the legitimacy of mr. muellers mandate.

in drawing out his decision-making until this week, mr. bach called for due process and stressed the importance of giving russia a fair chance to defend itself.

advertisement continue reading the main story

one defense came just after the early penalties for russian athletes at the 2016 olympics: a set of cyberattacks. a group known as fancy bear  which american intelligence officials tied to russias main military intelligence unit, the g.r.u.  published the hacked private medical records of top american athletes, as well as the private emails of antidoping officials who had lobbied for a ban on russia.

the hackers  the same group that stole emails from the democratic national committees servers and released them ahead of the 2016 election  called the athlete records proof of illegal drug use by stars such as simone biles and serena williams. all athletes had received necessary clearances to use the substances in question, and none of the information constituted a violation.

in a fiery interview in moscow last year, mr. mutko, the former sports minister and current deputy prime minister, echoed mr. putin, arguing that russia had been disadvantaged globally. in sports as in all things, he said, the decks were stacked against the nation.

this week, he was barred from attending any future olympics, though he remains at the helm of russias 2018 soccer world cup.

somebody has to take the responsibility, he said in july 2016, three months before mr. putin promoted him. there must be a master at home.