photo

there are two central facts about 21st-century u.s. politics. first, we suffer from asymmetric polarization: the republican party has become an extremist institution with little respect for traditional norms of any kind. second, mainstream media  still the source of most political information for the great majority of americans  havent been able to come to grips with this reality. even in the age of trump, they try desperately to be balanced, which in practice means bending over backwards to say undeserved nice things about republicans and take undeserved swipes at democrats.

this dynamic played a crucial role in last years election; its one of the reasons major news organizations devoted more time to hillary clintons emails than to all policy issues combined. but it has been going on for years. its the whole story of paul ryans career: journalists trying to be centrists desperately wanted to show their neutrality by praising a serious, honest, conservative, and promoted ryan into that role even though it was obvious from the beginning that he was a con man.

and its still playing out, as we can see from what looks like a looming debacle in facebooks efforts to institute fact-checking.

facebook wanted responsible fact-checking organizations to partner with, and several such organizations exist. but all of these organizations are constantly attacked by the right as having a left-wing bias  so it added the weekly standard, even though it clearly failed to meet internationally accepted standards for that role.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

so whats the basis for claims that, say, politifact is biased? hey, the weekly standard itself has explained the criteria:

surveys done by the university of minnesota and george mason university have shown that the supposedly impartial fact checking news organization rates republican claims as false three times as often as democratic claims and twice as much, respectively.

notice the implicit assumption here  namely, that impartial fact-checking would find an equal number of false claims from each party. but what if  bear with me a minute  republicans actually make more false claims than democrats?

advertisement continue reading the main story

take a not at all arbitrary example: tax policy. the gop is deeply committed to the proposition that tax cuts pay for themselves, a view that has no support whatsoever from professional economists. can you find any comparable insistence on a view experts consider false on the democratic side?