the cannibal

photo

blood diner (1987), by jackie kong. two brothers make a special dish with human flesh to serve at their run-down restaurant.

hannibal (2001), by ridley scott. anthony hopkins reprises his role as dr. lecter.

raw (2017), by julia ducournau. a coming-of-age tale in which a young vegetarian goes to vet school.

the mannequin

photo

tourist trap (1979), by david schmoeller. friends are stalked by an army of mannequins at a roadside museum.

dolls (1987), by stuart gordon. travelers stranded by a storm take refuge in a house inhabited by a special collection of puppets.

annabelle (2014), by john r. leonetti. a vintage doll with paranormal powers.

the demon child

photo

village of the damned (1960), by wolf rilla. all the women in town are impregnated with demon babies.

kill, baby  kill! (1966), by mario bava. one of the most memorable evil little girl characters in cinema.

ringu (1998), by hideo nakata. a videotape kills anyone who watches it within seven days.

ju-on: the grudge (2002), by takashi shimizu. a supernatural tale of vengeful spirits haunting everyone who enters their house.

advertisement continue reading the main story

a tale of two sisters (2003), by kim jee-woon. a young girl returns from a stay in a mental hospital to reckon with the trauma that drove her mad.

the demented clown

photo

killer klowns from outer space (1988), by stephen chiodo. a galactic twist on the bloodthirsty clown.

it (2017), by andy muschietti. adapted from stephen kings novel of the same name, the movie follows a group of outcast children fighting off a predatory clown.

the ghost bride

photo

the fall of the house of usher (1928), by james sibley watson and melville webber. it adapts the edgar allan poe classic into a 13-minute silent film.

corpse bride (2005), by mike johnson and tim burton. an animated tale of a murdered bride who finds new life after death.

the innkeepers (2012), by ti west. the employees of a haunted hotel receive unwelcome visits from the ghost of a bride abandoned at the altar.

the psycho killer

photo

deep red (1975), by dario argento. an early entry in the slasher-film-driven-by-a-faceless-killer genre.

american psycho (2000), by mary harron. based on the bret easton ellis novel, it stars christian bale as a serial killer hidden among new yorks moneyed class.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the macabre dancer

photo

the merry skeleton (1897), by the lumire brothers. less than a minute long, it was one of the first filmic depictions of a danse macabre.

the red spectre (1907), by segundo de chomn. a demonic magician faces off with a good spirit.

the damned

photo

the shining (1980), by stanley kubrick. jack nicholson plays a writer so tormented by writers block that he is driven to murder.

the devils candy (2015), by sean byrne. a painters stroke of brilliance damns him to a nightmarish ordeal.

the possessed

photo

repulsion (1965), by roman polanski. catherine deneuve turns the tables on her male abusers.

alucarda (1977), by juan lopez moctezuma. two teenage girls rebel against their religion and embrace satanism.

possession (1981), by andrzej zulawski. isabelle adjani plays a woman who becomes increasingly disturbed after separating from her husband.