if one party definitively shifted its position on an important subset of those issues  if the republican party shifted left on entitlements, for instance  the response by the other party could bring about a realignment. thats what mr. bannon says hes after.

in fact, he peddles two different visions of realignment, depending on his audience. sometimes its about building a diverse coalition united on issues of economic nationalism, pitted against a globalist opposition. when mr. bannon met with the teachers union president randi weingarten to discuss potential alliances or called the american prospect editor robert kuttner, a labor liberal, to chat up his admiration for mr. kuttners position on trade, this is the realignment he seemed to be pursuing. it was reflected in mr. trumps promises during the republican primary to protect social security, medicaid and medicare; invest in infrastructure; and raise taxes on hedge fund managers. the populist party shaped by this vision would undoubtedly include some racist deplorables, but the racism wouldnt be what defined the coalition  economics would.

more frequently, the nature of mr. bannons envisioned realignment appears different, and darker  centered around racial and ethnic identity. breitbarts output under mr. bannons editorial control and the trump who brought us the wall, the muslim ban and the response to charlottesville, va., are consistent with the goal of a cross-class party coalition of whites united by whiteness. economics wouldnt be what defines the coalition  white nationalism would.

the fact that mr. bannon serves simultaneously as, in the journalist ben smiths words, the guy selling a new cross-racial coalition and the chief arsonist of that coalition casts suspicion about how seriously to take his pronouncements. nevertheless, political science research confirms that large numbers of americans hold positions on issues that are both noncentrist and inconsistent with the standard line of either modern-day liberalism or conservatism. at least some raw material exists, in other words, for a transformation of party conflict.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

a single election sweeping an unorthodox candidate into power hardly suffices. president trumps evident disinterest in even trying to reorient republican governance away from priorities like welfare state retrenchment and regressive fiscal policy underscores the point. mr. bannon says he knows that realignments are something activists will have to grind out day in and day out for the next five, 10, 15, 20 years.

what he thinks those years of effort entail is less clear. investment in candidate recruitment and nomination challenges would be one component. on that score, though, the lack of consistent issue or ideological patterns in the challengers that mr. bannon has touted so far for 2018 is notable.

even more important would be the long-term intellectual work and institution-building necessary to build political alliances among existing or emerging groups. the tweedy quarterly american affairs presents itself as the high-level intellectual exponent of trumpism, while breitbart provides day-to-day red meat in the form of trolling, outrage and race-baiting cultural politics.

advertisement continue reading the main story

mr. bannons one institutional reform goal in the 2018 challenges invites further skepticism. he has said hes seeking a republican senate majority that would vote to do away with the filibuster, making it easier to pass mr. trumps agenda. this ignores the reality that even in the event of a filibuster abolition, the agenda helped would be orthodox republican  like the current tax cut bill  reflecting the priorities of the interests that dominate the party and the policy expertise of the heritage foundation veterans who staff the executive branch under mr. trump.

by contrast, a serious pursuit of reforms that could advantage populists might include changes to the campaign finance system, which currently facilitates the very party dominance by plutocrats that mr. bannon denounces.

if the potential is out there in the electorate to reshuffle the deck of political alliances and conflict, how would a serious realigner actually do it? such a person might look at the very realignment that produced our current, polarized age.

starting in the postwar years and throughout the second half of the 20th century, politicians in both parties deliberately pursued their reorientation around modern liberalism and conservatism. national politics at midcentury involved historically high levels of bipartisanship: conservative southerners remained an empowered force in the democratic party; liberal and moderate republicans were frequent occupants of east and west coast statehouses and senate seats.

key intellectuals, activists and politicians on both the left and the right came to share a systemic critique of the parties fuzzy programmatic overlap, as well as a democratic argument for forging disciplined, ideologically distinct parties in their stead. when, say, the united auto workers passed a resolution in the 1950s calling for a real realignment of the party system producing a clear demarcation between a liberal party and a conservative one, the liberal union was echoing contemporaneous sentiments expressed by the editors of national review, who criticized the fatuous celebration of bipartisanship and heralded a two-party system that fights its feuds in public and honestly.

the polarizers efforts involved both coalitional and institutional work. a postwar generation of issue-driven liberal activists battled to wrest control of democratic organizations from traditional political machines while challenging the clout of conservative southerners within the national party. on the right, intellectuals and operatives incorporated racial elements into a broader conservative ideology that helped to facilitate republican forays into the solid south. in the aftermath of the 1960s, meanwhile, movement activists like heather booth and michael harrington worked with the progressive wing of organized labor to reconstitute a labor-liberal alliance at the base of the democratic party, while new right political brokers like phyllis schlafly and paul weyrich secured a lasting partnership between republicans and a nascent christian right.

key activists recognized the party system as a system. transforming it would require not just ideological advocacy but reform of the party organizations themselves and the governmental institutions in which they operated. liberal democrats pursed congressional reforms that ended the sanctity of seniority and the autonomy of committees  which had long advantaged southerners  while concentrating new powers in a party leadership accountable to rank-and-file sentiment. others instituted reforms of the democratic presidential nominating procedure that opened them up to popular participation. these reforms rendered the political system more permeable and responsive to ideological activism, with long-term consequences for the parties ideological sorting. by drawing new party lines across an array of issues while rendering the parties vehicles for issue-oriented politics, the polarizers helped to construct our political world.

the story of how such a system came to be forged tells us something about what it would take to transform it. the ideologically defined partisan conflict that currently structures our politics is not the only world possible. but changing it would take as much collective and long-term effort as it took the polarizers to bring it about in the first place.