not long ago, the washington post published a photo essay entitled great moments in bernie sanderss hair. the gallery presented the vermont senators minimal manlo in various incarnations, including when it gracefully flowed in the washington air and when it puffed itself out like a glorious mane.

theories abound on the manlos m.o.

i dont think you would find many bankers or lawyers with those haircuts, said anne kreamer, the author of going gray: what i learned about beauty, sex, work, motherhood, authenticity and everything else that really matters. its a mark of individualism: we are not of the ordinary rank and file. it marks considerable self confidence.

kristen m. barber, an assistant professor of sociology at southern illinois university, carbondale, sees evidence of class status. there is a sign there that you are not worried about being judged, said ms. barber, the author of styling masculinity: gender, class and inequality in the mens grooming industry.

these men have the privilege of not caring, she said. the idea is that theyre too smart and busy. it almost becomes symbolic of how dedicated they are to their art and their science.

theres also the thinly veiled issue of male vanity. the airplane wings that are coming off so many of these men help them focus on that, rather than balding, ms. kreamer said. i think its a willful sense of camouflaging their age.

allan peterkin, the author of one thousand beards: a cultural history of facial hair and one thousand mustaches: a cultural history of the mo, suggested the term side-over to describe the phenomenon.

cynics might say they are doing a more sophisticated version of the comb-over or the middle-aged ponytail, a.k.a. go bushy where you can, to counter whats scant, said mr. peterkin, a professor of psychiatry and family medicine at the university of toronto.

advertisement continue reading the main story

on the flip side, the manlo can indicate that the wearer has enough years under his belt to be past worrying about appearances. its saying, ive earned my gray  or my white, mr. peterkin said.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story of the moment the lifestyle newsletter from the styles, travel and food sections, offering the latest trends to news you can use. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

it may be worth remarking that some of the most memorable follicular explosions are fictional. in the 19th century, the actor joseph jefferson portrayed peter pangloss in the comedy the heir at law with a coiffure that suggested a horizontal volcanic eruption. decades later, bozo the clown made a similar impression in orangy-red.

and then there was the mad inventor doc brown, played by christopher lloyd, in the 1985 film back to the future. (he may well have taken his cue from the shaggy avatar albert einstein.)

mr. peterkin noted the deliberately cultivated and performative aspects of many a manlo, even suggesting that graydon carter has sprayed his into submission. altogether, mr. peterkin feels, its clearly an affectation.

or is it? its unlikely that the 19th-century recluse langley collyer, one half of the collyer brothers, cared what the outside world thought of his wild fringe. nor did larry fine of the three stooges, who reportedly got his trademark finger-in-the-socket do when he neglected to dry off after a rinse in his dressing-room sink.

i would call the style benign neglect or even, to be more existential about it, benign indifference, said alexis levitin, a professor of english at the state university of new york at plattsburgh, who once had an accidental set of low-lying curls. i am in the vanguard of this look completely in spite of myself. god made it grow, at least on the sides, and i didnt interfere.

the future of the manlo is by no means clear. younger, not quite gray outliers include the producer brian grazer and the writer malcolm gladwell, and their approaches seem to be variations on a theme from punk to puffy.

who knows  the man bun bearer of today may well turn out to be the manlo embracer of tomorrow. after all, as gravity works its inexorable forces, there is nowhere to go but down.

i think millennials are too selfish to not look good for their cause, mr. peterkin said.