photo

saturday puzzle  we get a lot of questions about how clues are written for different days of the week, and kevin der returns with a puzzle that is not only packed with really lively entries and a whopping 11 debuts, but also provides us with an interesting analysis on how late week clues are written.

also, some completely unrelated thoughts on speed solving from me. many solvers like to speed solve and thats great. you do you. beating your personal best or the personal best of your frenemy is fun, but please dont compare yourself to the people who solve competitively. thats the best way to discourage yourself when youre building up a new skill. humor writer bill scheft is currently learning this lesson.

the whole point of solving a crossword puzzle, unless you are competing in the american crossword puzzle tournament, is to enjoy the wordplay and learn something. thats really it. when you rush through a puzzle, you miss the good stuff.

so im going to propose that we look at crossword solving the same way we look at physical training. when you are training at a gym or learning a new sport, you never do the same kind of training every day. some days you do weight work, some days you focus on increasing your aerobic capacity. its the same with improving your solving: on some days, focus on learning to read the clues and understand their intent. on other days, challenge yourself to get your speed up with some easy, early week puzzles. solve with a partner, because another brain may be able to solve things you dont know, and they keep you honest. and, of course, remember to stay hydrated.

advertisement continue reading the main story

a puzzle like mr. ders needs to be approached with care, and with the resolution that you will go slow enough to figure out these misdirected clues. if you try to solve a saturday puzzle like this one by trying to set a speed record, you didnt stop to enjoy entries like americana, calder cup, spill blood, el mariachi, slam poets, anti crime, tea taster, feel safe, say please, hot cereal (returning after a 45 year hiatus) and pampas cat. you will have missed some glorious misdirection, like entertainers for whom lines quickly form? for slam poets and producer of loose leaf notes? for tea taster.