but republicans still consider this tax an unacceptable burden on the rich. the senate bill would double the exemption to $22 million; the house bill would eliminate the estate tax entirely.

so now lets talk dollars. chip covers a lot of children, but childrens health care is relatively cheap compared with care for older americans. in fiscal 2016 the program cost only $15 billion, a tiny share of the federal budget. meanwhile, under current law the estate tax is expected to bring in about $20 billion, more than enough to pay for chip.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

as you see, then, my question wasnt at all hypothetical. by their actions, republicans are showing that they consider it more important to give extra millions to one already wealthy heir than to provide health care to a thousand children.

are there any possible defenses for this choice? republicans like to claim that tax cuts pay for themselves by spurring economic growth, but no serious economists agree  and thats the case even for things like corporate tax cuts that might have some positive economic effect. applied to inheritance taxes, this claim is beyond absurd: there is no plausible argument to the effect that letting wealthy heirs claim their inheritance tax-free will make the economy boom.

what about the argument that estate taxes are a burden on small businesses and family farms? thats a total, thoroughly debunked myth: each year only around 80  eight-zero  small businesses and farms pay any estate tax at all. and when you hear about family farms broken up to pay estate tax, remember: nobody has ever come up with a modern example.

then theres the argument of senator chuck grassley that we need to eliminate estate taxes to reward those who dont spend their money on booze or women or movies. yes, indeed, letting the likes of donald trump jr. inherit wealth tax-free is a reward for their fathers austere lifestyles.

meanwhile, heres the funny thing: while there is zero evidence that tax cuts pay for themselves, theres considerable evidence that aiding lower-income children actually saves money in the long run.

advertisement continue reading the main story

think about it. children who get adequate care are more likely to be healthier and more productive when they become adults, which means that theyll earn more and pay more in taxes. theyre also less likely to become disabled and need government support. one recent study estimated that the government in fact earns a return of between 2 and 7 percent on the money it spends insuring children.

by the way, broadly similar results have been found for the food stamp program: ensuring adequate nutrition for the young means healthier, more productive adults, so that in the long run this aid costs taxpayers little or nothing.

but such results, while interesting and important, arent the main reason we should be providing children with health care and enough to eat. simple decency should be reason enough. and despite everything weve seen in u.s. politics, its still hard to believe that a whole political party would balk at doing the decent thing for millions of kids while rushing to further enrich a few thousand wealthy heirs.

that is, however, exactly whats happening. and its as bad, in its own way, as that same partys embrace of a child molester because they expect him to vote for tax cuts.