lockhart basin lockhart basin original boundaries new boundaries declared by president obama dec. 2016 | 1.35 million acres reduced by president trump dec. 2017 | 201,876 acres (combined) canyonlands national park indian creek unit indian creek corridor indian creek corridor beef basin beef basin dark canyon wilderness dark canyon wilderness bears ears natural bridges national monument bears ears buttes bears ears buttes shash jaa unit moqui canyon moqui canyon cedar mesa cedar mesa comb ridge comb ridge grand gulch grand gulch valley of the gods valley of the gods navajo nation original boundaries new boundaries lockhart basin lockhart basin declared by president obama dec. 2016 | 1.35 million acres reduced by president trump dec. 2017 | 201,876 acres canyonlands national park indian creek unit beef basin beef basin indian creek corridor indian creek corridor dark canyon wilderness dark canyon wilderness bears ears bears ears buttes bears ears buttes shash jaa unit natural bridges national monument moqui canyon moqui canyon cedar mesa cedar mesa comb ridge comb ridge grand gulch grand gulch valley of the gods valley of the gods navajo nation original boundaries new boundaries lockhart basin lockhart basin declared by president obama dec. 2016 | 1.35 million acres reduced by president trump dec. 2017 | 201,876 acres canyonlands national park indian creek unit beef basin beef basin dark canyon wilderness dark canyon wilderness bears ears bears ears buttes bears ears buttes shash jaa unit moqui canyon moqui canyon cedar mesa cedar mesa comb ridge comb ridge grand gulch grand gulch valley of the gods valley of the gods navajo nation original boundaries new boundaries canyonlands national park indian creek unit bears ears shash jaa unit navajo nation declared by president obama december 2016 1.35 million acres reduced by president trump december 2017 201,876 acres original boundaries new boundaries bears ears president obama dec. 2016 1.35 million acres president trump dec. 2017 201,876 acres

president trump on monday announced deep cuts to the boundaries of bears ears national monument, a site that has become the symbol of the battle over americas protected public lands.

the monument, a vast, remote stretch of red rock canyons, dotted with native american sites, was reduced by 85 percent  more than a million acres  and divided into two disconnected parks. the nearby grand staircase-escalante national monument, designated by president bill clinton in 1996, was also diminished by 45 percent.

soon after the announcement, five native american tribes sued the trump administration, arguing that mr. trump was attempting to, in effect, abolish the bears ears national monument. several more lawsuits have since been filed by conservation, historical and outdoor industry groups.

bears ears has attracted controversy since president obama announced in december 2016 that he would protect the 1.35 million-acre site in southeastern utah as a national monument. republicans were quick to denounce the large, late-term declaration as a federal land grab and an overreach of executive power.

more recently, bears ears has become a focus for conservation groups and other organizations that oppose the trump administrations drive to open up public lands for development, agriculture, mining and other uses. companies like patagonia and r.e.i. have strongly supported keeping bears ears and other monuments intact.

heres a closer look at some of the sites that remain under protection, and those that have been cut out:

still in the monument

native american ruins known as the moon house complex. the moon house complex. kjschoen/istock, via getty images

the view from comb ridge in bears ears monument. rock art in the indian creek area.

the twin bears ears bluffs. hotel rock, inside shash jaa area.

credits clockwise from top left: reuters; tim peterson; tim peterson; kc mcginnis for the new york times.

credits: kjschoen/istock, via getty images; reuters; tim peterson; tim peterson; kc mcginnis for the new york times.

mr. trump first ordered a review of 27 national monuments in april. bears ears was the only one mentioned by name in his executive order. on monday, he used the antiquities act to formally downsize the monument.

the trump administration has argued that in protecting large swaths of land, previous presidents overstepped their authority under the act, which mandates that national monuments be confined to the smallest area compatible with proper care and management of the objects to be protected. mr. trumps monday order said the new boundaries would be consistent with that standard.

in a news release, the department of interior listed some of the sites that will remain within the new monument boundaries, including the bears ears buttes  two flat-top hills that jut out of the landscape. several native american sites, such as the moon house ruin and lime ridge clovis site, will also remain in the protected zones.

no longer in the monument

the moki dugway climbs to the cedar mesa. rock art in the moqui canyon area.

tourists take in the red sandstone buttes and spires in the valley of the gods area. travelers in the valley of the gods area. mark holm for the new york times

a cliff dwelling in the dark canyon wilderness area. pictographs at grand gulch.

credits for top two images: jim lo scalzo/european pressphoto agency; tim peterson. credits for bottom two images: u.s. forest service; josh ewing.

credits: jim lo scalzo/european pressphoto agency; tim peterson; mark holm for the new york times; u.s. forest service; josh ewing.

conservation groups, native american tribes and others who oppose the cuts say that important artifacts and sacred lands have been left out of the new monument boundaries, leaving the sites more vulnerable to development, looting, and other threats.

many native american artifacts, including dwellings and other ruins, are scattered throughout the area. theyre in the dark canyon wilderness, cedar mesa, the white canyon. the list really goes on and on and on, said tim peterson, a program director at the grand canyon trust. that's why the obama administration made the proclamation as large as it was, because the entire landscape is blanketed by these kinds of features. its pretty hard to pick a canyon and hike in it for a while and not find something.

only a very small part of this area has been subject to a cultural resources inventory, he added.

native american tribes and other groups assert that mr. trump did not not have the power to shrink bears ears in the first place. the antiquities act, they say, grants the president the authority to create national monuments, but not to rescind or reduce them. the department of interior did not return a request for comment.