photo

for those who knew him, it is hard to believe that ali abdullah saleh, yemens longtime ruler and one of the most cunning autocrats of our time, is finally gone.

time and time again, mr. saleh seemed to outmaneuver death. he dodged a blizzard of bullets over the years, along with a bombing that left his skin mottled, his right hand stiffened like a claw. hed held power for so long  even after his nominal ouster from the presidency in 2011, he remained a dominant force in yemen  that he seemed almost welded to the landscape.

mr. saleh was in many ways the quintessential arab dictator. he was not as brutal as saddam hussein of iraq or the assads of syria, not as flashy as libyas muammar el-qaddafi. but he may have been the greatest master at the cynical politics they all deployed: the art of making oneself indispensable by destroying or corrupting everyone and everything else. this wily survivors game staved off revolt for decades in the arab world. it also helped to doom the 2011 uprisings, leaving us with the sad landscape of civil war, jihadism and economic collapse today in the middle east.

the last time i saw him, in january 2014, mr. saleh had the look of an embittered patriarch. he was sitting at a round table in the vast courtyard of his palatial house in sana, yemens capital. he wore a suit and tie, as always, and issued commands to underlings in a guttural, contemptuous voice. he looked unusually thin, and the skin on his neck and wrist was blotched from skin grafts. it was amazing he was alive at all: the bombing of the mosque at the presidential palace in june 2011 had burnt him badly and killed several of his guards.

advertisement continue reading the main story

after i walked out of his compound that day, i wrote an article lamenting the poisonous influence he still wielded on his divided, beautiful, desperately poor country. i expected him to hate it. i was wrong. he loved the article, so much that he had it reprinted on the cover of his own political partys newspaper, with a photograph of the two of us talking. it didnt take long to see why: mr. saleh didnt mind being called evil as long as you called him powerful. he wasnt in it for the money, though he did pocket billions of his countrys (relatively meager) oil profits. he didnt binge on women or drugs. he didnt even seem to care that much about posterity. he wanted power, at any cost.