thats worrisome for many reasons, he says, chief among them that it may result in subpar medical care for some patients. case in point: californias universal blood disorder screening program has identified thousands of nonblack children with the sickle cell trait and scores with the disease  patients who, had doctors stuck to received wisdom, might have been missed.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

professor yudell belongs to a growing chorus of scholars and researchers who argue that in science at least, we need to push past the race concept and, where possible, scrap it entirely. professor yudell and others contend that instead of talking about race, we should talk about ancestry (which, unlike race, refers to ones genetic heritage, not innate qualities); or the specific gene variants that, like the sickle cell trait, affect disease risk; or environmental factors like poverty or diet that affect some groups more than others.

the push to retire the race concept may seem to contradict another progressive trend in medicine: increased attention to how race affects treatment. research suggests that blacks and other minorities are less likely than whites to receive treatment for pain and fare worse in a number of medical outcomes. the issue is complex, but some scientists think that doctors unconscious stereotyping partly drives these disparities.

advertisement continue reading the main story

so how can we fix the issue unless we frankly acknowledge what drives it  the perception of race? indeed, rather than discarding the idea of race, some medical schools now include unconscious bias training, classes in which students are essentially asked to contemplate their own often unintentional racism.

such initiatives are not entirely incongruous with the goal of superseding race. the idea in both cases is to push beyond the clunky race labels we have inherited, as well as our own preconceptions about those labels, and to see people with greater clarity and nuance than those categories and their attendant biases generally allow.

in biology, race is roughly analogous to the idea of subspecies, and the argument over its utility for humans has some history. after championing the concept as useful for categorizing human variation in the mid-20th century, the evolutionary biologist theodosius dobzhansky began to see that scientists needed a more precise way to talk about human diversity, and said as much. the race concept had been used to justify so much cruelty and oppression that its value, he came to realize, was questionable.

in the decades since, others have reiterated those points. whats new today is that modern genetic science has revealed just how arbitrary the old race categories  negroid, caucasoid, mongoloid and so on  really are. yes, there is variation in the human family, but there are few sharp divides where one set of traits ends and another begins. rather, traits exist in gradients, reaching high frequency in some populations and lower frequency in others. as the geneticist sarah tishkoff of the university of pennsylvania reminded me, human beings are too young as a species, too promiscuous and full of wanderlust, always moving and mixing, for the kind of separation and differentiation that would cause true speciation to have occurred.

the truth is that there is sometimes more variation within what we call races than there is between them. a study led by the geneticist j. craig venter highlights this point. he compared his genome to that of james watson, one of the two scientists who discovered the double helix shape of dna. dr. venter focused on six genes that affect how we respond to antidepressants and antipsychotics, among other drugs. dr. venter and dr. watson are caucasian. dr. venter had two copies of a caucasian variant of one of these genes, but dr. watson carried a version more common in east asian populations. judging by self-reported race, dr. venter noted, a doctor might prescribe dr. watson the wrong dose of medicine.

the takeaway from studies like this is that rather than relying on race, doctors should focus on the genes important to whatever puzzle they face  an approach often called precision or personalized medicine. the idea is that tailoring treatment to the patients genotype, not to skin color or hair texture, would improve outcomes.

consider the case of kidney disease. scientists have found that african-americans fare worse than whites when it comes to this illness. the assumption had long been that some environmental factor explained the difference. but in recent years, scientists have linked certain variants of a gene called apol1 to worse kidney-related outcomes. those variants are enriched in people of african ancestry. girish n. nadkarni, a kidney specialist at icahn school of medicine at mount sinai in new york city, explained to me that scientists think this may be because those variants protect against the sleeping sickness endemic to some parts of africa.

but not all african-americans carry the variants. that is important because, in an attempt to account for the higher risk of kidney problems among african-americans, kidney donor registries include information about race. and kidneys from black donors might be discarded on the assumption that they are more prone to failure. but by looking directly at whether patients and donors carried this gene variant  in particular, two copies of it  scientists at the university of alabama at birmingham recently found they could theoretically improve transplant outcomes. kidneys donated from black donors that might otherwise have been discarded could, with genotyping, go to patients who needed them.

advertisement continue reading the main story

not everyone agrees that it is possible or even desirable to completely scrap the race concept. alex lickerman, founder of imaginemd, a medical concierge service in chicago, cites the example of prostate cancer. for unclear reasons, african-americans have a higher risk than whites. one test for the cancer, which looks at prostate-specific antigen, is controversial because it can yield false positives. some recommend against using it at all.

but dr. lickerman says that merely being aware that african-americans have a higher disease risk impels him to order the test more often for african-american patients. to his mind, the elevated risk of cancer outweighs the risk of a false positive. race is a crude marker, but its a usable marker, he said. in that respect, it is no different from other factors doctors consider, most of which are based on imperfect studies of limited size and scope, and need to be weighed carefully.

furthermore, we still dont know all the genes responsible for observed health disparities. in a future utopia, explains esteban burchard, a professor of pharmaceutical sciences and medicine at the university of california, san francisco, wed have this information. patients medical files would contain information about their unique genomes. but were not there yet. we cant even give people basic health care, dr. burchard said. are we going to pay for everyone to get genotyped?

in some cases, it is precisely the nongenetic aspects of race that are important in understanding what ails a patient. if you want to understand the life expectancy of people in ferguson, mo., for example  where the justice department found that the police department needed to be overhauled in part because of racial bias  it is critical to know whether the person is african-american. genetics dont matter there, dr. burchard said. what drives those disparities are environmental  that is, social  factors.

african-americans, who on average have about 20 percent european ancestry, suffer from high blood pressure more often than whites do. some studies indicate that among african-americans, the darker ones skin, the greater the risk of high blood pressure. the pattern could indicate that african ancestry is responsible.

yet africans in africa dont generally have high blood pressure. so some argue that the experience of having dark skin in the united states  of experiencing racism  is whats raising blood pressure. in this case, dr. burchard says, even though race is a social construct, the best way to talk about the associated disease risk may be to use the labels, since the societal baggage that comes with them may be causing the problem.

but the hope is that one day we can use modern genetic tools to bypass the quagmire of race entirely. consider the research of alan wu, a lab director of the zuckerberg san francisco general hospital. dr. wu is working to improve a basic blood test that measures red blood cells, white blood cells and so forth.

currently, when it comes to ancestry, the test compares everyones blood against a single standard. this is a problem because whats normal probably varies according to ancestry. dr. wu hopes to devise a version of the test that accounts for variations in blood count according to ancestry. but instead of using self-reported race as a way to specify this variation, he is trying to determine patients backgrounds directly with genetic testing  looking at what proportion of a persons dna comes from east asia, say, or europe.

science seeks to categorize nature, to sort it into discrete groupings to better understand it. that is one way to comprehend the race concept: as an honest scientific attempt at understanding human variation. the problem is, the concept is imprecise. it has repeatedly slid toward pseudoscience and has become a major divider of humanity. now, at a time when we desperately need ways to come together, there are scientists  intellectual descendants of the very people who helped give us the race concept  who want to retire it.