photo

nearly nine million children across the country receive health care services through the childrens health insurance program, enacted with bipartisan congressional support in 1997 to provide health care coverage for children from eligible families with low and moderate incomes. in our four states  massachusetts, montana, nevada and oregon  more than 300,000 children rely on the program, known as chip. but any day now, if congress doesnt act, these kids could lose the health care they depend on.



since the program went into effect, the percentage of children who are uninsured has dropped from 15 percent to 5.3 percent. children who would otherwise be uninsured can now visit doctors for the regular checkups all kids should have and get the treatment they need when theyre sick or hurt, whether theyre suffering from a sore throat, a broken bone or a life-threatening illness. chip doesnt just provide insurance coverage for children  it indirectly provides financial stability for many working families who depend on the program to cover their childrens health care. many of them would otherwise be financially devastated by their kids hospital bills.

now, the program is on the brink of elimination. as congress debated health care proposals, federal funding for chip was allowed to expire in late september. when chip became law two decades ago, it was a bipartisan success story. and it will take bipartisan action in the coming weeks to avoid a congressional failure that will hurt many of the countrys children.

governors like us are horrified by this possibility, because we know how much the people who live in our states and depend on chip will suffer if congress fails to act. failure to reauthorize chip would harm children and families almost immediately. according to the federal medicaid and chip payment and access commission, nearly every state will exhaust its federal chip allotments early in 2018. several will exhaust them even sooner. when our money runs out, our states will face crippling cuts to our childrens health care coverage.

advertisement continue reading the main story

thats why, over the past several months, governors have actively worked with our congressional delegations and federal officials to offer bipartisan strategies for reauthorizing chip.