10 things to do now in nyc its a big city, with plenty to do, see, hear and watch. heres a sampling of cultural highlights this weekend and over the week ahead.

image alternative gifts, plus speakers and workshops, will be part of the bust holiday craftacular. above, a moment from last year's london craftacular. credit garry maclennan/bust magazine

spare times

arts and minds, and gifts

the bust holiday craftacular at the brooklyn expo center

the feminist bimonthly magazine bust has been around since 1993, emerging from a culture embracing riot grrrl bands and, to a lesser extent, jane pratts seminal girl-centric teenage publication sassy. part of busts tradition  besides its downtown cultural sensibility, d.i.y. ethos and enlightened political consciousness  is the craftacular, a riot of music, indie shopping (as bust puts it) and progressive attitude. begun 12 years ago as a holiday event in brooklyn, the craftacular has expanded to other seasons, and to cities like london, boston and los angeles.

this years new york holiday installment  from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. on saturday and sunday at the brooklyn expo center in greenpoint  features about 150 vendors selling a variety of gifts, many homemade. a new companion event (also at the center) is the bust school of creative living, offering guest speakers like the new york times columnist lindy west and the actress-writer amber tamblyn; music from female-centric bands; and educational workshops in areas like wellness, crafting and herbalism. (the vendor area is free; a $40 day pass allows admission to all talks, performances and workshops.) guests will find high spirits, interesting ideas and probably the perfect gift for their favorite feminist. andy webster

for more information, check the event website.

image the countertenor anthony roth constanzo and members of the international contemporary ensemble in a 2016 version of suzanne farrins la dolce morte. credit julieta cervantes for the new york times

classical music

from artist to nobleman with love

la dolce morte at the metropolitan museum of art

suzanne farrins monodrama, based on love poems written by michelangelo for a young roman nobleman, returns to the met (at 7 p.m. on friday and saturday, and 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. on sunday) after its powerful premiere performances last year. eric jurenas is now the countertenor in a production created by the director doug fitch, with accompaniment provided by the international contemporary ensemble. david allen

see a list of mini-reviews for more current productions.

image perfume genius has four coming new york engagements. see listing below. credit caitlin o'hara for the new york times

pop & rock

an albums intimate scale, in venues to match

perfume genius at the bowery ballroom and music hall of williamsburg

many musicians spend their careers building up to an album like no shape, the one that the singer-songwriter perfume genius (known offstage as mike hadreas) released in may. its a revelatory work, developing mr. hadreass experiences of love and loss into a virtuosic song cycle of himself  at turns bold (slip away), elegiac (wreath) and sexy (die 4 u), and quite often all three at once. the albums intimate scale has translated well to large rooms this year, but these performances at a pair of smaller venues (the first two dates, at 9 p.m. on sunday and monday, are sold out; the williamsburg dates are at 9 p.m. on tuesday and wednesday) are likely to be particularly powerful. simon vozick-levinson

andrea bocelli, lil pump, yo la tengo and more pop and rock concerts.

image alex song, left, and dan lee in asian af. see listing below. credit arin sang urai

comedy

west coast humor comes east

asian af at upright citizens brigade theater east village

this variety show, originally created by the actor will choi at u.c.b.s los angeles outpost, eventually made its way to the east coast with great fanfare  and fans. tickets to the show, which features asian-american improv, sketch, stand-up and musical performers, regularly sell out. aparna nancherla is slated for this installment, at 10:30 p.m. on tuesday, along with fumi abe, jordan mendoza and improv from a handful of u.c.b. regulars. kasia pilat

see who else is making new yorkers laugh this week.

image cyd charisse and kirk douglas in two weeks in another town (1962). see listing below. credit everett collection

film series

movies, italian style

roman hollywood at film forum

italy became a hot spot for hollywood filmmakers after world war ii. through dec. 21, film forum is surveying the results, along with the work of some italian directors gone american (sergio leones once upon a time in america, screening dec. 21). making movies abroad is dramatized in vincente minnellis two weeks in another town (friday and dec. 19), a 1962 spiritual sequel to the bad and the beautiful in which an aging star (kirk douglas) is lured to italy by a longtime collaborator (edward g. robinson). other highlights include billy wilders poignant avanti! (friday and dec. 21); martin scorseses gangs of new york (friday); and even wes andersons the life aquatic with steve zissou (dec. 15).

ben kenigsberg

want more? see a guide to film series and screenings in new york.

image one of the self-portraits by bartolom estebana murillo at the frick. see listing below. credit michael bodycomb/the frick

art & museums

youre on candid canvas

murillo: the self-portraits at the frick collection

two flawlessly executed selfies (on display through feb. 4) by bartolom estebana murillo, a leading painter of the spanish golden age, are united for the first time in centuries in this revealing, somewhat melancholy exhibition on mastery and aging. around 1650, the 30-something murillo painted himself as an ambitious young painter with pursed lips and arched eyebrows, staring out incongruously from a block of ancient marble. he was already imagining himself as a man for the ages, but success seems to have worn down murillo in the later self-portrait (above), from about 1670. his hair is thinner, he has developed a double chin, and he extends his hand as if desperate to connect to us. jason farago

read the original review.

see a selection of mini-reviews of current exhibitions.

image school girls; or, the african mean girls play has been extended for a second time, through dec. 31. credit sara krulwich/the new york times

theater

beauty, competition and malice

school girls; or, the african mean girls play at the lucille lortel theater

in jocelyn biohs comedy about beauty, difference and malice, the pupils at a ghanaian girls school compete for their shot at beauty pageant fame. in his review for the new york times, jesse green wrote, the nasty-teen comedy genre emerges wonderfully refreshed and even deepened by its immersion in a world it never considered. under the tony winner rebecca taichmans direction, zainab jah and myra lucretia taylor star in this mcc production, now extended for a second time, through dec. 31. alexis soloski

read the full review.

our guide to plays and musicals coming to new york stages, and a few last-chance picks of shows that are about to close.

image pilar garcia as tomte in the black glove. see listing at right. credit kamoier williams

for children

holiday cheer, hand-delivered

the black glove at the gene frankel theater

it certainly doesnt sound like a holiday title. but then, you wouldnt expect august strindberg to create anything called the red mitten. yes, this dour swedish master wrote a christmas play and, even more surprisingly, its for children. presented through dec. 16 by august strindberg repertory theater, in a new verse translation by anne-charlotte hanes harvey, the production centers on the lost object of the title, which seems to confer the seasons spirit on anyone who finds it. its original owner, however, has none of that warmth. a meanspirited, wealthy young mother, she thinks that her maid has stolen her ring, which is actually inside the missing glove. a tomte (pilar garcia), similar to an elf, conspires with the christmas angel to teach the woman a lesson. points are scored, but this being a holiday entertainment, she ends up more like scrooge than like miss julie. laurel graeber

find more events for children and families.

image vijay iyer will appear at the nublu jazz festival. see listing below. credit jake michaels for the new york times

jazz

hot sessions under club lights

nublu jazz festival at nublu 151

nublu 151 is a dimly lit dance club that presents the odd jazz star every now and again. this week is the start of its eighth annual jazz festival (at 8 p.m. through dec. 17), which features a long list of heavyweights. on saturday, vijay iyer plays with his trio, and the veteran trumpeter eddie henderson performs with a quartet. on sunday, theo croker, a rising trumpet talent, shares the bill with the collective innov gnawa. thursdays show might be the highlight: it features the young vibraphonist joel ross; the drummer nate smiths band, kinfolk; and the trumpeter steven bernsteins group sexmob. giovanni russonello

find more jazz shows for the coming week.

image a scene from tesseract. see listing below. credit mike bello

dance

its live, no, its on film, no, its both at once

charles atlas, rashaun mitchell and silas riener at brooklyn academy of music, harvey theater

in the early 70s, the video artist charles atlas began working with the choreographer merce cunningham; one project was called a video event. now mr. atlas teams with two former cunningham dancers, rashaun mitchell and silas riener, on another video event: tesseract. the program (at 7:30 p.m. wednesday through friday, and at 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. on dec. 16) begins with a 3d dance film, followed by a live performance thats filmed, then manipulated by mr. atlas, and projected in front of the dancers, creating layers nodding to history. brian schaefer

see whats happening around the citys dance scene.

and theres more

what to cook this weekend and what to read this week.

sign up for the louder newsletter stay on top of the latest in pop and jazz with reviews, interviews, podcasts and more from the new york times music critics. see sample please verify youre not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. * required field you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times products and services. thank you for subscribing. view all new york times newsletters. an error has occurred. please try again later. you are already subscribed to this email. view all new york times newsletters. sign up