i didnt talk about womens desires in this essay for a couple of reasons. one, i am not a woman. two, female bosses are not going around flashing their genitals to young men powerless to stop them over and over again. it just isnt happening. that is to say, the brutality of the male libido has been exposed and is being exposed over and over again, which is causing this moment of reckoning. as for the question of what is culture and what is biology, we obviously want to believe that everything brutal in ourselves is simply bad social programming, because it makes us feel that there are solutions to the crises we face.

plublius: for decades my sex drive was relentless. getting old and losing my libidos drive was like being cut loose from a lunatic. it takes some combination of institutions: marriage, religion, female modesty/gatekeeping (yup, females have a role in checking men), fatherhood, and to a lesser degree, police, lawsuits, human resource departments, etc., to keep things in check.

with that out of the way, what do we do about it? i dont have a solution. we are a liberated and libertine society, which has ridiculed and destroyed the very institutions that once helped men grow into gentlemen.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story sign up for the opinion today newsletter every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from op-ed columnists, the times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

marche: plublius isnt alone. the playwright sophocles once experienced something similar, according to the first book of platos republic. sophocles, who had grown very old, said that being impotent was a relief, and that he felt like he had escaped from a frantic and savage master. i think many men can sympathize.

but i dont have a lot of nostalgia for the old institutions. any close examination of their history shows pretty evidently that they rest on the assumption that women are chattel. the equality of women to me is a given; making that truth real is the most important humanistic revolution of all time. besides, though the past had different ideals, human sexuality was always disruptive. sex has been and always will be a problem no matter what ideology you follow. i think thats whats been made so clear in the past few months. it doesnt matter what political program any man subscribes to.

theresa: if this is just about sexual gratification, people like harvey weinstein would just hire an escort. the joining of your libido to the harassment, abuse and manipulation of others is how we know someone is morally repugnant and not merely overrun by hormones or made a bad decision.

marche: the specific pathologies of the individual men in question, while they are, to be frank, totally fascinating to me, arent particularly revealing. each one is a separate matrix of the inevitably corrupting nature of power and a distorted libido. they amount to little more than themselves.

advertisement continue reading the main story

but i do believe that it is somewhat nave to say that libido isnt about power itself  not always but often. consider a runaway best seller like fifty shades of grey. consider the content of almost all pornography. that to me is the darkness into which we have yet to look: how much of sex itself is about power? im not sure were going to like an honest answer to that question.

nm plublius: barack obama once remarked that if men represented the problem of rape, then by the same token, men represented the solution, too.

likewise with sexual harassment and other unwanted advances. this cant simply be reduced to a male versus female issue. decent-minded men need to be heard, too, with the message that violent and forced displays of virility do not demonstrate strength; self-restraint and respect for women do.

marche: i wholeheartedly agree with this comment. i am totally uninterested in being on team man or team woman. surely this is not how we lead our lives. and i do find the framework of the debate cripplingly partisan. as a man, i do not recognize, in most forms of feminism, an understanding of masculinity that corresponds to reality.

on the other hand, men are way, way, way behind women in their thinking about their lives as gendered beings. i mean, way behind. decent men need to be heard, but decent men, first of all, need to listen. they need to start listening to women and to the revelations of womens experiences that we are witnessing. that should be mens first focus right now. then they need to start listening to themselves and figuring out what it means to be a man.

unfortunately, the situation is a bit of a catch-22. the men who have the strength to be vulnerable enough to examine their own nature have, in a sense, already made the crucial leap. the men who dont have the strength to look at themselves cannot make the leap. i am pessimistic.