as the fires began, mr. garcetti, who has lived through his share of fires and earthquakes, sought to reassure a city watching the fast spread of out-of-control fires, whipped by santa ana winds and with the potential to inflict catastrophic damage across wide swaths of the city.

these are days that break your heart, he said. these are also days that show the resilience of our city.

by thursday night, with the smoke cleared and most of the flames gone, mr. garcetti appeared visibly relieved over how los angeles had been, at least relatively, spared.

this was hardly the most severe disaster california has endured  fires in other parts of the state were more challenging to their elected leaders  and if one believes the predictions of geologists, the worst may be yet to come. but it offered some insight into the style of this mayor, something of a test after nearly five years in charge  and at a time when mr. garcetti has encouraged a bit of national attention by suggesting he may want to run for president.

in los angeles, especially at moments like this, there are few jobs as critical as fire chief. and it was ralph m. terrazas, whom mr. garcetti promoted to fire chief soon after he became mayor, who appeared most at his side, offering technical updates on fire conditions and reports on how he was dispatching his 3,200-member force across this 500-square-mile city, where the speed of a response can determine whether a fire is a passing brusher or a conflagration that forces the evacuation of thousands of homes.

at the height of the disaster, 900 members of the los angeles fire department were spread out across the region, fighting three major fires and battling back scores of other outbursts. they were among an army of 2,000 firefighters, many of whom had come in from across the state to assist in the effort. six-hundred members of the citys police department were also assigned to the fires.

raphael j. sonenshein, executive director of the pat brown institute for public affairs at california state university, los angeles, said that this episode had spotlighted, at least for now, the strong relationship mr. garcetti had with his police commissioner and the fire commissioner. those relations have frequently been strained with mayors in the past, and that has caused problems when the city had to come together.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

when the relationship between mayor and chief is toxic  think bradley-gates  its not good of either of them when disaster strikes, mr. sonenshein said, referring to tom bradley, who was mayor of los angeles from 1973 to 1993, and daryl gates, his police commissioner.

advertisement continue reading the main story

by the time mr. garcetti arrived on thursday morning for a private briefing by fire and police officials at the command center for the skirball fire, the blaze  which at one point loomed as a potentially major threat to some of los angeles most affluent neighborhoods  was considered to be far less of a threat. but danger still loomed.

the command post at the west los angeles veterans affairs campus, just off the 405 freeway, was bustling with firefighters and police officers. mr. garcetti, wearing a blue city hall windbreaker emblazoned with his name, mingled with firefighters in front of the command post, comparing photographs of the fire on their phones and trading information on what they had heard in the field.

mr. garcetti walked over to to a map of the fire taped onto the wall as an assistant chief, corey rose, brought him up-to-date. the the mayor dutifully scribbled notes, asking questions that reflected the decidedly technocratic spirit he has brought to city hall. (example: what is the containment in rye, do you know? the mayor asked, inquiring about a fire in santa clarita.)

the role of mayor in los angeles is almost vague by design, reflecting a cumbersome government system in southern california that would seem to confound any attempt to manage a complicated crisis.

there are 88 cities in los angeles county, with los angeles being the largest. the county is controlled by a five-member board of supervisors. that means, more often than not, that it is the mayor who becomes the face of a crisis. but the mayor doesnt have the overall authority over the response.

so when millions of mr. garcettis constituents were startled wednesday night by their phones buzzing with an emergency alert warning of extreme fire danger, the mayor had nothing to do with it: that alert was sent out by the state.

not that he would have blocked it, mr. garcetti said.

i said overcommunicate, he said. you saw how many people died up north, he added, referring to the northern california fires in october.

mr. garcetti has never been much of a showman, at least in the tradition of, say, edward i. koch or rudolph w. giuliani, two new york mayors who regularly became identified with the biggest crises of their cities.

but when he turned up tuesday morning for the first fire, he wore protective gear  the yellow jacket  and an official mayor firefighters helmet. that was out of necessity, he said later, recalling the embers raining down from the sky. in this mayors view, politicians in these kinds of settings should wear civilian clothes, and leave the uniforms to the officers. as he spoke, he picked up his firefighter helmet from the seat, and moved it to the back of the s.u.v.