mr. moores campaign said it would address what it called the nelson yearbook forgery at a news conference in montgomery on friday afternoon.

the inscription has become a major focus in mr. moores efforts to refute claims by nine women that he made unwanted advances or worse toward them when they were teenagers and he was in his 30s. the apparent difference in the lettering of the inscription and the words underneath, which include a date and the words olde hickory house, have spawned weeks of amateur analyses and conspiracy theories, and have led mr. moore to repeatedly suggest the yearbook was a fake.

there are a lot of alabamians who are looking for any piece of evidence to say this was all an attempt to trash the name of roy moore, and there will be a lot of people who do seize on it and try to make that argument, said elizabeth beshears, a republican consultant in alabama who said she believes mr. moores accusers.

photo

the tide has turned in his favor in the last week and a half or so, ms. beshears said, and i think this really will probably help him.

mr. moore, a conservative former judge, was expected to cruise to a fairly easy win over doug jones, a democrat and former prosecutor, to fill the senate seat left open by the appointment of jeff sessions as attorney general  until last month, when a series of women came forward with accusations. one woman said she was only 14 when mr. moore dated her, took her home and touched her over her underwear.

as mr. moore struggled to refute the allegations  which initially repulsed some voters and prompted republicans in washington, including mitch mcconnell, the senate majority leader, to call for mr. moore to drop out of the race  his allies focused on ms. nelsons yearbook.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

ms. allred, who has represented women in prominent sexual harassment cases for decades, refused multiple requests to review the yearbook, saying she would only release it to congressional investigators if a hearing was convened about the allegations against mr. moore.

mr. moore, who has posted almost daily on twitter, calling the yearbook fake, on friday wrote, in an apparent reference to ms. nelson, now she herself admits to lying.

advertisement continue reading the main story

the news about the yearbook came at the end of a week in which mr. moore enjoyed a new infusion of support from the republican party, including an endorsement by president trump and funding from the republican national committee, which severed ties with his campaign last month.

paula cobia, a lawyer for gloria deason, who has said mr. moore took her on dates and ordered her alcohol when she was 18, said ms. nelsons admission had not undermined ms. deasons story or that of the other accusers.

the inscription and his signature look completely authentic. the fact that she might have written and she says that she did the olde hickory house or whatever underneath it, so what? ms. cobia asked.

each accusation, ms. cobia added, stands on its own.