general mcmaster said ms. powell would continue to work on the israeli-palestinian peace process after leaving the white house. officials said she might even travel to the region with mr. kushner and the presidents special envoy, jason d. greenblatt, though the prospects for an accord seem more elusive than ever after mr. trumps recognition this week of jerusalem as the capital of israel.

ms. powell, a former philanthropic executive at goldman sachs who served in the george w. bush administration, arrived at the white house through ms. trump, with whom she worked during the transition developing proposals related to the economic empowerment of women.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story get the morning briefing by email what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox monday through friday. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

but ms. powell soon pivoted to national security, drawing on her experience as an assistant secretary of state for educational and cultural affairs under secretary of state condoleezza rice. she was a key architect of mr. trumps first foreign trip, which was viewed as a major success after he received a lavish welcome in saudi arabia and israel.

she was also deeply involved in drafting the national security strategy, a document that lays out the administrations approach to issues like nuclear proliferation and upheaval in the middle east. that document is expected to be released in the coming weeks.

an egyptian-born coptic christian who grew up in texas, ms. powell helped mitigate the perception that the trump peace team was stocked with staunchly pro-israel figures like mr. kushner, mr. greenblatt, and david m. friedman, the ambassador to israel  all of whom are orthodox jews.

ms. powells arabic language skills also helped her negotiate with saudi and egyptian officials. in april, she played a role in obtaining the release of an egyptian-american aid worker, aya hijazi, who was detained in cairo. ms. powell, who at the time was traveling in the region with defense secretary jim mattis, escorted ms. hijazi home.

dina has done a great job for the administration and has been a valued member of the israeli-palestinian peace team, mr. kushner said in a statement. she will continue to play a key role in our peace efforts and we will share more details on that in the future.

advertisement continue reading the main story

ms. powells name has also surfaced in speculation about a shake-up in the administrations foreign policy ranks. if, as expected, secretary of state rex w. tillerson leaves his job in the coming months, a potential successor would be nikki r. haley, who is the american ambassador to the united nations. with her home base in new york, ms. powell is viewed as a candidate for the united nations post.

that speculation subsided in recent weeks after administration officials said mr. trump was leaning toward mike pompeo, the director of the c.i.a., as a replacement for mr. tillerson.

but ms. powell, whose office is on the second floor of the west wing and next to ms. trumps, had a good relationship with the president, according to colleagues. although she will be one of the most prominent officials to depart since john f. kelly took over as chief of staff, there is no indication that she was in disfavor with either mr. kelly or the president.

dina powell has been a key, trusted adviser in this administration, said the press secretary, sarah huckabee sanders. she has always planned to serve one year before returning home to new york, where she will continue to support the presidents agenda.