over all there is a sense of overreach by china, and the way this statement is worded will compound that, said rory medcalf, head of the national security college at australian national university. this statement will be seen as unhelpful and provocative in some circles in australia.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story subscribe to the australia letter newsletter damien cave, our new australia bureau chief, shares insights on global news, local recommendations and feedback from readers in this weekly newsletter. please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

china has long treated australia as a laboratory for soft power experiments, flexing its economic muscle, sending students to study at its universities and creating organizations with close ties to the communist party.

australias loose and opaque campaign finance laws have made the country especially vulnerable to outside influence. earlier this year, australias intelligence chief identified two prominent businessmen of chinese descent, who have donated millions of dollars across the political spectrum in recent years, as possible agents for the chinese government.

since then, australia has been engaged in an intensifying discussion about whether to accept or resist chinas dominance in the region. the debate has sharpened recently amid accusations that senator sam dastyari of the opposition labor party hewed to chinese foreign policy on some issues after accepting money from chinese-born political donors.

the proposed new foreign influence laws are one clear result of such concerns. but it is unclear to what extent china is concerned about the laws themselves.

one provision would require people working on behalf of another country to register with the australian government, as is mandated in the united states. among the other proposals, there are plans to create an offense known as unlawful interference in australias political system, which would include behaviors  as yet unspecified  that harm the national interest.

some people who are especially concerned about chinese interference in australia have welcomed the proposals as much-needed counterweights.

advertisement continue reading the main story

this is an exciting development indeed, although it should have happened earlier, said feng chongyi, a chinese-born professor at the university of technology sydney who has often criticized chinas suppression of dissent.

photo

china may see the laws as inevitable, he said.

if that is the case, some experts argue, the embassys statement wednesday may in fact be an effort to pressure the australian news media, and to influence how the media is perceived by the chinese australian community.

the embassy statement focused intensely on media accounts of so-called chinese influence and infiltration, arguing that they were made up out of thin air and reflected a typical anti-china hysteria.

it also argued that australias discussion about chinas role has unscrupulously vilified the chinese students as well as the chinese community in australia with racial prejudice, which in turn has tarnished australias reputation as a multicultural society.

john fitzgerald, a professor at swinburne university who spent five years representing the ford foundation in china, said the chinese government seemed to be trying to portray itself as the defender of chinese australians against the australian news media.

the embassy itself is stirring up concerns within the chinese australian community that have no foundation, mr. fitzgerald said, adding: the media is not attacking the chinese australian community. the media is being very specific about communist party interference in this country.

so far, australian officials have chosen not to escalate the argument. julie bishop, australias foreign minister, said in a statement wednesday evening that the australian government enjoys a respectful and constructive relationship with china.

mr. medcalf said the statement from the chinese embassy had one line that could be helpful: china has no intention to interfere in australias internal affairs or exert influence on its political process through political donations.

that is a statement china will be held to, he said. lets hope china is serious.