this year, the consumer bureau started an investigation into the mortgage lending practices at wells fargo. the investigation, according to two people familiar with it, centered on whether the bank incorrectly charged customers who wanted to lock in lower mortgage rates.

the inquiry was delayed amid a broader shake-up at the agency, according to the two people. the turmoil began last month when mr. trump appointed mr. mulvaney as the acting director of the agency after richard cordray resigned.

on his way out the door, mr. cordray named leandra english as his acting deputy director and presumed acting director. after mr. trump tapped mr. mulvaney to the role, it created the unusual scenario of two people laying claim to the same post at the helm of a federal agency, with lawyers debating whether the dodd-frank act, which created the consumer bureau, or the federal vacancies reform act provided the authoritative answer to who has the authority to install an acting director.

newsletter sign up continue reading the main story please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. invalid email address. please re-enter. you must select a newsletter to subscribe to. sign up you agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for the new york times's products and services. thank you for subscribing. an error has occurred. please try again later. view all new york times newsletters.

thus far, mr. mulvaney has won out.

inside the agency, mr. mulvaney, who has himself criticized the bureau, immediately instituted a number of changes. he halted hiring, froze all new rule-making and ordered a review of all active investigations. the wells fargo investigation was included in that broader review, the people said. but mr. mulvaney has not made any decision about how to proceed, they said.

john czwartacki, a senior adviser at the bureau who also serves as mr. mulvaneys spokesman at the office of management and budget, said he could not comment on pending enforcement matters.

as a matter of principle, acting director mulvaney shares the presidents firm commitment to punishing bad actors and protecting american consumers, mr. czwartacki said.

for those who have been concerned that mr. trump is infringing upon the bureaus independence by installing mr. mulvaney, the assertion that penalties against wells fargo will not be dropped was more reason to worry.

if anyone needed more evidence of the serious threat to the independence of the consumer financial protection bureau from this administration, it appeared on twitter this morning as trump appeared to intervene directly into enforcement action, said lisa donner, the executive director of americans for financial reform, a progressive group that promotes stricter regulation of wall street. a white house official like mick mulvaney shouldnt be trying to run the consumer bureau.

americans for financial reform has filed a lawsuit to block mr. mulvaneys appointment to temporarily lead the bureau. they have argued that he cannot preserve its independence while also maintaining his job as white house budget director.

advertisement continue reading the main story

tom goyda, a wells fargo spokesman, declined to comment on mr. trumps tweet.

shares of wells fargo were unfazed by the prospect of more penalties. the companys stock price was up slightly in midday trading.